<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></h2>
			<p>Conclusion</p>
			<p>To what results have we been brought by the preceding examination of the Holy Word? “We answer in the following</p>
			<p>Summary.</p>
			<p>If the preceding exegesis be correct, then it is true that “ ’The Coming of the Son of Man” is not to be confounded with “The Coming of the Lord.” The former refers to his coming “as a man” to introduce and take upon himself the administration of the “kingdom of God”⁠—the Christian Dispensation. When that work was entirely accomplished, he was no longer the “Son of Man.” Henceforth he was “the Son of God in power.”</p>
			<p>The phrase, “The Coming of the Lord,” as used by the Apostles, refers to a period in the history of Christians, and of each Christian in particular, when <strong>a cluster of momentous facts</strong> shall simultaneously occur. The feeble faith and earthly estimates of the Christians of our day fix upon death, considered as the termination of the animal life, and of the present social and earthly relations, as the great fact. The clear-visioned faith and spirituality of the Apostles and inspired writers saw chiefly, and almost only, in this cluster, the Parousia⁠—the fact that then there would come over them such a change in the mode of their being, as to render them like the glorified Jesus, like saints, like angels: so that henceforth Jesus and saints and angels would be to them “present” in the same sense that men in this life are, when together, present to each other. To them, the death of the body was only as the throwing down of the scaffolding, that the building might appear, and be in fact ready for occupancy.</p>
			<p>We have further come to the conclusion, that the Judgment is contemporaneous with the Coming of the Lord⁠—that the word Judgment as used in the Scriptures, is nearly equivalent to the modern word <em>government</em> in all its functions: and that judgment was given to the Messiah when the government was placed upon his shoulders. So that he has judged men⁠—given them not only law but award, ever since he was constituted “the Son of God in power,” or, in his own words (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 16:27), “rewarded every man according to his works.”</p>
			<p>And we have found that the Resurrection⁠—the development and commencing exercise of the spiritual body, is one of these facts. The “change” by which the mortal gives place to immortality is “in a moment.”</p>
			<p>And finally, the Anastasis, by which is meant a Future Life, dates in all its completeness from this epoch.</p>
			<p>We have found in the Bible no “Intermediate State”⁠—that state which is neither probationary, punitive, nor remunerative, and has therefore no place in the moral administration of God.</p>
			<p>We have not found the Bible teaching an “End of the World.” An end of the then present <i xml:lang="el">αἰών</i> (dispensation) it does indeed teach, but no end of the <i xml:lang="el">κόσμος</i> (world)</p>
			<p>It will be noticed, that in the view we advocate, we consider the future history of man⁠—of each man in particular, and of all men⁠—to be <em>in accordance with established laws of nature</em>. As he comes into being and develops his powers up to the time of his death, under such laws, so, we think, his course will, from that time onward, be <em>natural</em>. Death, what we know of it, is natural. Why not suppose that the next step in the order of change⁠—in the process of the being⁠—vwill be also natural ; and the next; and so on forever. Why not suppose that the mode and circumstances of introduction to the future world and of progress in it are all natural, as are those of introduction to and progress in this world?</p>
			<p>As distinguished from this, the common theory implies <em>a constant succession of miracles</em>. The theory that makes the body that shall be raised, identical with the present body, implies miracles without number. We would not deny the possibility to God, of preserving the precise particles of which the bodies of all men severally as they die are composed. God could so arrange it, that at the time in which each man died, there should not be one gaseous particle, that was in the body of any other man when he died; and this through all time. At any rate, we cannot prove the contrary. But we think no one will deny that it implies a continued series of miracles. The scenes of the last day, as implied in the common theory, are of course miraculous.</p>
			<p>But, cui bono? What good is to be accomplished by such miracles? Miracles have ever, so far as we know, been wrought to impress the minds of men with the power and goodness of God, or to sustain a claim to a divine mission or communication. No such object can be contemplated in all the miraculous wonders of the common theory of “the end of the world,” the Judgment, and the Resurrection. At the time when all this series of miracles from the creation of the world to its end, and so multitudinous, shall appear as such to men; and when all the sublime wonders of-a burning world, and falling stars, and rushing heavens, and archangel’s voice, and trump of God, shall be enacted; it will be too late to accomplish any good upon men. The wicked will be lost past recovery, and the good will be beyond the need of miracles such as these, or any other. Indeed, the more intelligent portion of: the Christian world are so now. Were all these “ wonders” to pass before my eye to-day, it would not enhance my conviction of the greatness and goodness of God one jot or tittle. It is the <em>moral</em> manifestations that have been already made in the glorious, precious facts of the redemption which there is in Christ Jesus, and which are now being made in the processes of that redemptive work, that captivate the heart. These furnish a glory to my heart that must eclipse all possible physical manifestations. Let all the scenes that are so eloquently described in President Dwighi’s sermon on The Judgment, pass actually before me, and it were, as a manifestation of the heart of God, tame and unmeaning, in comparison with the mild but glorious manifestations of Redemption. The susceptibilities to which these last make their appeal, are immeasurably above, and, as affected, more controlling than those addressed by physical sublimity. And, moreover, the <strong>facts</strong> of the Judgment will be such as to render the mind indifferent to all this drapery⁠—both in the good and in the bad. Heaven and hell will then be impressive realities, in comparison with which any physical phenomena that can be furnished by this material world, will be of little interest. “ And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, <em>from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away</em>.” God alone, and our relations direct to him, will be thought of in the day of final Judgment, and not any phenomena of “the earth and the heaven.”</p>
			<p>Orthodoxy.</p>
			<p>We attach reat importance to a sound reputation for sound orthodoxy. But what is sound orthodoxy? Not exclusively the “<em>form</em> of sound <em>words</em>”⁠—so reputed. On the subject of the Resurrection, we think it will be difficult to determine what orthodoxy is.</p>
			<p>The Synod of Dort (1618, 1619) gives us the following as the views of the <em>Reformed Churches</em>:⁠—“Finally, we believe, according to the Word of God, when the time appointed by the Lord (which is unknown to all creatures), is come, and the number of the elect complete, that our Lord Jesus Christ will come from heaven, <em>corporeally and visibly</em>, to declare himself Judge of the quick and the dead; burning this old world with fire and flame to cleanse it. And then all will personally appear before this great Judge, both men, and women, and children, that have been from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, being summoned by the voice of the archangel and by the sound of the trumpet of God. For <em>all the dead shall be raised out of the earth, and their souls joined and united with their proper bodies, in which they formerly lived</em>. As for those who shall be then living, they shall not die as the others, but be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and from corruptible become incorruptible.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Conf.</abbr> of Faith</i>, <abbr>Art.</abbr> 37.</p>
			<p>The following is from the Westminster Catechism: “The self-same bodies of the dead which were laid in the grave, being then again united to their souls forever, shall be raised up by the power of Christ.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">Q.</abbr> 87. The following from the Confession of Faith: “ All the dead shail be raised up with the self-same bodies, <em>and none other</em>.” <abbr>Chap.</abbr> 32.</p>
			<p>The English Church, in <abbr>Art.</abbr> 4, says: “Christ did truly rise again from death, <em>and took again his body, with flesh, bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of mans nature, wherewith he ascended into heaven</em>, and there sitteth, until he return to judge all men at the last day.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Shepard, of the Theological Seminary, Bangor, uses the following language: “Said he to his disciples, a little before his ascension, ‘Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Handle me and see; for a spirit hath not <em>flesh and bones</em>, as ye see me have.’ <em>And, with the same body, he went up into heaven.</em>”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">National Preacher</i>, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1858.</p>
			<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spear, as the reviewer of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Bush (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Bib.</abbr> Repository</i>, 1845, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 261, 262), has the following: “<em>Again, is the identity one that consists in the same number of material particles in the two bodies, or im the presence of some, or all of the very same particles in the two bodies?</em> ‘The Scriptures -do not decide this question; and an answer, that should possess any certainty, is plainly beyond the reach of philosophical inquiry. Some have supposed that the resurrection-body will be constructed of the identical atoms composing the body that dies; while others - think that not <em>all</em> of these atoms will be in the future body, but <em>some</em> of them, sufficient to constitute an identity. Not knowing what is true, we shall not venture to affirm. In order, however, not to dodge a question just when it may be supposed to press us most severely, we will give the author the privilege of making any supposition that suits him best. He may put <em>all</em> of the atoms into the resurrection-body, or <em>some</em> of them, or <em>he may leave them all out</em>⁠ ⁠… Give me an identity between the present and future body for the residence of the soul, as complete, substantial, and real, as that of my present body during successive periods, and | ask no more. And if in the latter case I may have it with an entire change of elementary particles, why may I not equally have it in the former?”</p>
			<p>What now is orthodoxy on the subject of the Resurrection? We doubt if, at the present day, there can be found many who will subscribe to the grosser theory. Few will claim more than is claimed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spear, who, in the name of orthodoxy, is calling <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Bush to account for non-orthodoxy. What, then, is the criterion by which to try opinions on this subject?</p>
			<p>We shall perhaps be pardoned, if, in this connection, we say, in plea of a charitable estimate of our humble volume, that this is a day, unlike any other, of independent thinking. The community are educated as never before, and trained to habits of reading and <em>study</em>. The literature of the day is addressed, as was not that of a former period, to the reasoning faculty. Our civil functions, even, encourage every man, as sharing in the responsibilities of his nation’s governmental administration, to think for himself. Authority no longer forms the creeds of men, politieal or religious. The Past does it not. We must see for ourselves. So it should be. And we have derived erroneous inferences from facts that have fallen under our observation, if there are not many readers of the Bible, who are pursuing an original investigation, and forming their own independent creeds. We have found the man of gray hairs in this attitude, and those of younger years in such numbers, as to justify, we think, the inference that the Spirit of God is, by an all-pervading influence, leading the lovers of truth right to the fountain.</p>
			<p>If this be so, then, while we may expect a general agreement, we shall have, of course, in greater number than before, specific differences. And our charity must adjust itself into harmony with its obligations in the premises. Men must and will think for themselves. And the cry of <em>heresy</em> will not deter those who are <em>of the day</em> from this duty and privilege. Far from it. On the other hand, it will have the effect to drive those, whom the church and orthodoxy most need, into relations other than those of the most effective auxiliaryship.. Unity with variety is the order of things in nature. And if, in the sphere of theological opinions and functions, that variety is a litile in excess, and includes some error, that excess is a less evil than the want of unity. There are good men in our day, who would be made better by cultivating a more familiar acquaintance with the fourteenth chapter of Paul’s Epistle to the Romans. The divinely authorized standard of orthodoxy is⁠—“<strong>For God hath received him.</strong>”</p>
			<p>There are topics on which the public mind is in an especial state of unrest. The subject of this volume belongs to this class. The formularies, above quoted, do not satisfy the common mind of the church. And it is asking for light. The doctrine of Inspiration needs to be examined. And as bearing, not only on the subjects discussed in these pages, but on others, and some of them the most momentous of our holy Religion, the question of <em>what is and what is not tropical language</em>, needs a thorough investigation. On this subject, we think the language of Robinson may be applied with special emphasis: “The Lord has more truth yet to break forth out of his holy Word.” The attitude in which for the church to be found, then, is that of incitement to investigation, and of willingness to receive more light. And let her tolerance and her encouragement be extended to the humblest of her sons, who would hope to shed, if but one and the feeblest ray of light upon what are yet regions of comparative darkness and obscurity.</p>
			<p>In respect to the several subjects discussed in the preceding pages, the <em>facts</em> are essentially the same with the “most straightest” orthodoxy, in all save the <em>time when</em>. We are anastasized by being put in possession and use of a spiritual body; and that body is a structure from the present body, and is brought out by eliminating the grosser material of the “flesh and blood,” and “corruption,” and “weakness” of the present. In this all agree. The difference is, that the present theory makes men to be anastasized <i xml:lang="el">ἕκαστος ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ τάγματι</i>, <em>each one in his own order or rank</em>, while the other does not. The common theory dispenses with ranks, and makes all rise at the same time. We make the process of anastasizing a natural process, by which men, by a law of nature (<i xml:lang="el">τῷ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγῳ</i>, 2 Peter 3:5), pass from the animal to the spiritual body⁠—investing with logic and propriety the argument of the Apostle, 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:12⁠–⁠18; while the common theory makes the anastasis a miracle, and makes it occur at “the end of the world.” The essential facts are the same ; the time and some of the circumstances of their occurrence are different.</p>
			<p>So of the judgment. Both theories alike make Christ the Judge; the matter of account, the deeds done in the body; and the decision irrevocable; and both alike refer to <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 25, and especially to <abbr>vs.</abbr> o1⁠—46, as directly and unequivocally authoritative on the point. And both admit⁠—itis at least the general impression⁠—that heaven and hell do in some sort have their commencement in immediate sequence to death. The difference between the two theories is this: we make men die, and after that the Judgment. Jesus is upon the throne of his government, and adjudicates upon men. as they severally appear before him⁠—or as he “appears” to them. They are then judged, and the joy and the woe that succeed, are in execution of the judgment of this “ great day.” We suppose that the rich man, who “in hell lifted up his eyes being in torment,” had been judged and doomed to that experience. So of the angels, who “in chains of darkness and suffering the pains ~ of hell are given over, confined, to punishment” (2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 2:4). So of the wicked, who are “confined under inflictions, for a day of punishment” (2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 2:9). The common theory makes these guilty beings punished before they are tried and condemned; and assumes that they are to suffer on in this way till the “ end of the world,” and then are to be brought to trial, and doomed. So of the righteous; they are in Paradise, and in the fulness of their joy they sing, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain and hath redeemed us to God by his blood. So of the holy angels, who in heaven do always behold the face of the Father. They are, at the “end of the world,” to be brought to trial, and receive a legal title to that, the fruition of which has so long been theirs informally.</p>
			<p>With reference to the Coming or Appearing of the Lord, it is a question of time, and also of circumstance. Our theory is, that the Lord “ comes” to men at death (so <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart interprets John 14:3. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Bib.</abbr> Sacra</i>, 1852, <abbr>p.</abbr> 343), and that the appearance or manifestation 1s accomplished by the natural change that then passes upon them, in respect to the mode of their existence. So that the appearing is post mortem. The common theory 1s, that by a miracle, there is to be a physical manifestation by the coming of the Lord in the clouds. Whether it is to be in a human form, or some other, we know not.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> And whether the angels are to be in human form, we know not. And whether there is to be a literal trump, we know not.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> From all we can gather from authors on this subject, we suppose the theory is, that the resurrection will precede the appearing of the Lord; and that bodies, as at present constituted, are to be revivified, so that, with these same eyes of the bodily sense, the “appearing,” whatever it is, will be seen. Then the change from the natural to the spiritual body will take place in the air, after they are caught up. Landis makes the body to be raised a <em>spiritual body</em>, and then to be again changed, and fashioned like unto Christ’s glorious body. This is, in verity, a “first resurrection” and a second.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></p>
			<p>Ethical Import.</p>
			<p>On a question like the present, whose decision must rest on a “ ’Thus saith the Lord,” we should introduce our philosophy only with the greatest caution and with modesty. Still, as there are different opinions, as to what is the divine teaching, it may, with propriety, be asked of the two several interpretations, which is in closest harmony with the teachings on other subjects, and with the general spirit of the Bible ; and especially which embodies the greatest amount of moral power for the good of men and the glory of God. Tried by this criterion, we affirm unhesitatingly, that the exegesis of these pages towers immeasurably above the other. The common theory carries the Judgment far, far, we know not how far into a distant future. So of the resurrection of the body. If any importance belongs to a union of the soul with its future body, that importance is diminished as a present motive, by its distance. If heaven and hell have really no substantial beginning till that remote day⁠—as some hold, and as all should hold, to be consistent⁠—we understand enough of the philosophy of the human mind to know, that they are exceedingly divested of moral power by their distance.</p>
			<p>We know it will be said by some, that the Judgment is virtually at death, and that the destiny of men is then known by themselves and others with them in the spirit world, and that men do, in fact, at death, enter heaven or hell. But if this be so, which we do not deny, why is so much said of the awful, glorious day of Judgment, and why so much moral importance attached to it? The above reply virtually makes that Day and its scenes a mere gorgeous pageant⁠—a thing of no substantial importance in the moral administration of God over the world. But, we are told, it is to be a day of <em>manifestation</em>, and God is then to vindicate his ways to the universe. To make a full manifestation in any such sort as to bring individuals to trial⁠—and that is the moral bearing of it as inculcated⁠—it will take a period of immense length. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Hopkins says, as long a period as from Adam to the end of the world. It would take a thousand million times as long. For it should be remembered that each hour of the world’s history implies the individual history of one thousand millions for that hour. Will God inflict⁠—what other word can our hearts accept⁠—such a scene for such a period upon the holy inhabitants of heaven? For my own part, I do not ask God to clear up a solitary fact of his administration to my heart. For though parts of his ways are enshrouded in mystery, I have, notwithstanding, a <em>perfect</em> conviction, a joyous, blessed conviction that all he does is right. My heart asks no explanation. It would be grieved if such were offered, and turn away from the presentation. No; I want no “vindication of the ways of God to man,” other than that which the present is constantly furnishing. Much less after dwelling long and happy ages in heaven shall I want it.</p>
			<p>And then the moral tendencies of such an exhibition. To contemplate for a thousand million years multiplied by the years of earth’s history, the wickedness of men and devils, in all its horrid forms of enactment, will it promote and develop the holiness of the saints? For my own part, I think I should need more of special grace to secure my safety there, than even my great infirmities demand in this present evil world. And I cannot believe that such a spectacle, for such a period, would promote either the good of creatures or the glory of God.</p>
			<p>Now, on the other hand, our interpretation makes the day of the Lord very near, and brings eternity⁠—the Appearing of the Lord, the Judgment, the investiture with the spiritual body, close to us. Before the setting sun, I may “meet the Lord,” and see him as he is; may stand before the judgment seat of Christ; the mortal may have put on immortality. Am Ia stupid worldling? These startling realities are at the door. Am I a disciple of the Saviour, and waiting for his appearing, and hastening the day? Imay rejoice, for the day of my redemption draweth near. Hternity, in all its completeness, is brought close to me, and I feel the fulness of its moral power.</p>
			<p>Beyond all question, <em>if</em> the view taken in this volume is the correct one, its power as a system of motive is immeasurably greater than that of the common view. But, this admitted, and you have one of the strongest proofs of its correctness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
