<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV: The Resurrection</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Resurrection</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There attend upon the thought of dying two questions, than which none can be more important:⁠—Shall we exist beyond the grave? and if so, What will be the conditions of that existence? These questions present the subject of this Chapter. In regard to the second question we shall consider only the constitutional element of the future life.</p>
			<section id="chapter-4-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Old Testament</h3>
				<p>We have had occasion repeatedly to remark, that the Old Testament saints had but very inadequate ideas of a Future State. In the book of Job⁠—“the oldest book in the world”⁠—there are frequent allusions to such a state; but it is a world of mere existence, of ghosts, of silence, darkness, and passivity. It is not heaven, nor a world to be desired. It is scarcely hell. There is perhaps a single allusion to punishment as inflicted after death, but it is spoken of as the opinion of “travellers” or men from other nations (21:29, 30). But the man of Uz had no such views of the future world as to explain the mystery of his calamities as a good man. Still less his friends. See Job 7:9, 10; 10:20⁠–⁠22; 14:7⁠–⁠14, 18⁠–⁠22; 16:22; 17:1, 11⁠–⁠16.</p>
				<p>In the Pentateuch we find no motives drawn from the future world. The Saviour teaches us that the doctrine of a future existence beyond the grave is implied in the words that came from the midst of the burning bush: “I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Yet, but for such interpretation we might not have felt authorized to find here such a meaning, or to understand anything other than that He who addressed Moses was the same who had been to the Patriarchs a God, and would be such to him as he had been to them. He had guided and protected them, he would guide and protect him.</p>
				<p>Even David could say, “In death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?” <abbr>Ps.</abbr> 6:5. Hezekiah in his sickness said, “The grave (Sheol) cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy truth.” <abbr>Isa.</abbr> 38:18, 19</p>
				<p>The Old Testament makes no allusion to the <em>mode of existence</em> that succeeds the present. Some have considered Job (19:25⁠–⁠27) as speaking very definitively on the subject of the resurrection of the body. But when we consider the allusions elsewhere made by this same author, and that this book probably antedates all the other portions of the Sacred Volume⁠—its author and its hero both having lived, as is supposed, before Moses⁠—the supposition of a clear and definite statement of the doctrine of the Resurrection, is preposterous. What Job in this passage, rightly interpreted, says, is, “I know that my Deliverer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> lives. And erelong he who now lies in the dust will arise (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> to health). Although my skin is consumed, I shall yet in this body see God,” that is, as the language of the Orient, He will be my friend, and admit me to his presence.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Dan.</abbr> 12:2, 3. “Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. (3) And they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>This is supposed by many to refer to the Resurrection. But it is surprising that in a connection where the boldest imagery is all along employed in predicting the future, this particular portion should be construed literally. Besides, the connection of thought forbids us to understand the language as referring to a distant future⁠—the end of the world. The burden of the visions that Daniel saw, was the then future history of the Jews. The interpreter was sent to tell him what was to befall <em>his people</em> in the latter day. In <abbr>chap.</abbr> 11 he had brought down that history to the death of Antiochus Epiphanes. After this, Michael would stand up for them. A degree of comparative rest was given them from this time to near the time of their destruction. The Romans, indeed, made them a sort of colony, but they were left in the free exercise of their religion; and their external prosperity was not seriously impaired. But there was then to come a time of trouble, such as there never was since there was a nation. But then⁠—singular language⁠—“thy people shall be delivered, <em>everyone that shall be found written in the book</em>.” This language is most obviously referred to in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:21, as having its fulfilment in the facts of that day. Says the Saviour, in almost the very language of the prophet, “Then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be.” And then, as predicted, God’s people⁠—those who were really such, and whose names were written in the Lamb’s book of life⁠—were delivered. Christ gave to his disciples so definite a statement of what should be the signs of this day of evil, that they were enabled to flee to a place of safety.</p>
				<p>Next in order in the vision of the prophet, <abbr>vs.</abbr> 2, 3, the dead were raised. A life-giving power was to go forth and stir up, as in their graves, the very dead. Some would awake, and as “wise” or “ teachers,” live a glorious life, and turn many to righteousness: while others, rejecting the proffered grace, would find it a savor of death unto death. This we understand to refer to the Gospel, and to its proclamation not to the Jews merely, but to the “many;” and especially to the Gentiles, who were, as not true of the Jews, asleep in the very dust of the earth. The language indicates the coming in of the Christian Dispensation, and the effect of the means of grace in Christ Jesus upon the world, Gentiles as well as Jews.</p>
				<p>We are happy to be able to quote the following from Matthew Henry. In his commentary on <abbr>v.</abbr> 2, he says: “When upon the appearing of Michael our prince, his gospel is preached, many of them that sleep in the dust, both Jews and Gentiles, shall be awakened by it, to take upon them a profession of religion, and shall rise out of their Heathenism or Judaism; but since there will be always a mixture of hypocrites, with true saints; it is but some of them that are raised to life, to whom the gospel is a <em>savor of life unto life</em>, but others will be raised by it <em>to shame and contempt</em>, to whom the gospel of Christ will be a <em>savor of death unto death</em>, and Christ himself set for their fall. The net of the gospel incloseth both good and bad.”</p>
				<p>We cannot agree with Henry in supposing that by Michael is meant the Messiah; and from some of his specific applications should therefore dissent. We quote him as sustaining the exegesis that by “many that sleep in the dust of the earth,” is to be understood the “dead in trespasses and sins.” These are awakened to spiritual life.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> George Judkin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.D.</abbr>, President of Lafayette College, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise on the Prophecies</i>, makes the following comment on <abbr>v.</abbr> 2: “The chronology of the writer leads us here to understand this of the same <em>spiritual awakening</em>; and yet the force of the language in our English translation has led most commentators to the conclusion that a real bodily resurrection is intended.⁠ ⁠… The natural and proper force of the language does not at all involve the idea of dead bodies of men coming to life again; but only of persons in a careless and secure condition being aroused, rather arousing themselves, to vigorous action, shaking off the dust of indolence, and calling their powers forth into exercise⁠ ⁠… The very clods of Gentilism, the sleeping ones of earthly clay, shall stir themselves up, and inquire after the Lord.⁠ ⁠… The cold earth that has slept for ages in all the darkness of paganism and delusion, shall be thrown into vast commotion. The blinded heathen, multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, and all over the world, shall rouse up and act vigorously in reference to religion and eternal things. Of the vast masses of mankind who shall thus be brought into energetic action, some will inquire successfully and find the way to salvation, ‘and so live forever;’ ‘some to everlasting life;’⁠—others will spend their faculties in perverting and opposing the truth, as the Romans, Pagans, and the Mohammedan-pagans, and all forms of heretics now do, and shall utterly perish ‘in shame and everlasting contempt.’⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“By the context and the natural force of the original terms we are shut up to this interpretation, and must conclude that we have in it the mind of the Spirit. <em>These words do not teach a resurrection of the body.</em>”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Later Jews</h3>
				<p>At a later period we find a more practical conviction of a future existence. It was regarded as decidedly a state of rewards and punishments. The “seven brethren with their mother” (2 <abbr>Macc.</abbr> 7), who suffered martyrdom under Antiochus Epiphanes, were sustained by the expectation of a blessed hereafter. Said one of them in the agonies of a cruel death (<abbr>v.</abbr> 9), “Thou like a fury takest us out of this present life, but the King of the world shall raise us up who have died for his laws, unto everlasting life” (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς αἰώνιον ἀναβίωσιν ζωῆς ἡμᾶς ἀναστήσει</i>, <em>will raise us to an everlasting revival of life</em>⁠—a revivification that shall know no succeeding death).—Another, when dying, said (<abbr>v.</abbr> 14), “It is good, being put to death by men, to look for hope from God, to be raised up again (<i xml:lang="el">πάλιν ἀναστήσεσθαι</i>). As for thee (Antiochus), thou shalt have no resurrection to life” (<i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις εἰς ζωήν</i>).</p>
				<p>With the men of this period the philosophy of a future state was crude and undefined. They seemed to think of the future life as much like the present⁠—with the same or a similar material organization. Thus, one of the brothers, when his hands were about to be cut off, and his tongue plucked out, said, “These I had from Heaven; and for His laws I despise them; and <em>from him I hope to receive them again</em>” (<abbr>v.</abbr> 11). And the mother said to the sons (<abbr>v.</abbr> 23), “Doubtless the Creator of the world⁠ ⁠… will also of his own mercy give you breath and life again” (<i xml:lang="el">τὸ πνεῦμα καὶ τὴν ζωὴν</i>).—Razis, when sinking under his wounds, “plucked out his bowels, and taking them in both his hands, he cast them upon the throng; and calling upon the Lord of life and spirit to restore him those again, he thus died.”⁠—2 <abbr>Macc.</abbr> 14:46. See also 12:48⁠–⁠45.</p>
				<p>The Jews of this period <em>made no distinction between the future state and the resurrection of the body</em>. They conceived of the soul as living only in a state of corporeity. By <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> (anastasis)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> <em>they expressed the future condition of man</em>. Knapp, who is high authority on such subjects, says, “<em>Both among the later Jews and earlier Christian writers, there ts no distinction made between immortality and the resurrection; both are considered as the same thing.</em>” And he adds, strangely inconsistent with his own belief⁠—“<strong>It is the same frequently in the New Testament.</strong>” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 616. This is precisely our doctrine. It is the doctrine of the Bible rightly interpreted.</p>
				<p>Josephus says (<abbr>Ant. B.</abbr> 18, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>sec.</abbr> 3), “They (the Pharisees) also believe that souls have an immortal vigor in them, and that under the earth there will be rewards or punishments according as they have lived virtuously or viciously in this life, and that the latter are to be detained in an everlasting prison, but that the former shall have power to revive and live again” (<i xml:lang="el">ταῖς δὲ ῥαστώνην τοῦ ἀναβιοῦν</i>). He afterwards says (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">B.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>ch.</abbr> 8, <abbr>sec.</abbr> 14) of the Pharisees, “They say that all the souls are incorruptible, but that the souls of good men only are removed into other bodies (<i xml:lang="el">μεταβαίνειν εἰς ἕτερον σῶμα</i>,) but that the souls of bad men are subject to eternal punishment.” This explains the extract from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antiquities</i>. In this last quotation it is said that the Pharisees believe the souls <em>only of good men</em> pass into other bodies. But Paul tells us the Jews (and it must be the Pharisees and not the Sadducees who believe that the soul dies with the body) allow that there shall be a <em>resurrection</em> of the dead, <em>both of the just and unjust</em>. Hence we see that in the language of that day “resurrection” implies future existence, irrespective of the connection of the soul with a body. Both the righteous and the wicked are to experience a <em>resurrection</em>: the good only to have a <em>future body</em>.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">New Testament</h3>
				<p>But what are the teachings of the New Testament Scriptures? To these we reverently turn. We ask, simply, what do they, rightly interpreted, import? We have no sympathy with those who think the Apostles were in error; none with those who put a forced construction upon the inspired words, in accommodation to a philosophical theory. The Bible itself is profoundly philosophical. We have no thought of setting the sun by our dial. We are not satisfied with any interpretation that does not make the Bible consistent with itself. And when such commentators as Locke, Jonathan Edwards, Barnes, Olshausen, Arnold, and others think the Apostles were in error on some of the points on which they have written in the Sacred Volume, we cease to follow with confidence their interpretation. We seek an exegesis of the inspired language that will make it harmonize with itself and with all truth.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>Matthew 22:23⁠–⁠32</p>
					</header>
					<p>The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no resurrection, and asked him, (24) Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. (25) Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his brother; (26) Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. (27) And last of all the woman died also. (28) Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven? for they all had her. (29) Jesus answered and said unto them, ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. (30) For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. (31) But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, (32) I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The Sadducees say there is no Anastasis, and it is added, Acts 23:8, “neither angel, nor spirit.” “The doctrine of the Sadducees is this, that souls die with the bodies” (<abbr>Ant. B.</abbr> 18. <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 4).</p>
				<p>“They take away the belief of the immortal duration of the soul, and the punishments and rewards of Hades” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wars</i>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">B.</abbr> 2. <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> 14).</p>
				<p>It was with these opinions they proposed the case of the woman who had had seven husbands. The inquiry contains in itself the evidence that by Anastasis they meant future state. “In the Anastasis whose wife shall she be of the seven?” They could not of course mean to ask, whose wife she should be in the act or at the moment of raising the bodies at the end of the world. But whose should she be in <em>the future state</em>⁠—in which future state they did not believe.</p>
				<p>The answer of Christ is equally decisive. “In the Anastasis they neither marry, nor are given in marriage.” The Saviour surely did not gravely assert that amid the wonderful and miraculous events of what is called the last day⁠—as supposed to be described literally in 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:16, 17. 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, 52; and 2 Peter 3:10, people would not be occupied in the affairs of wedlock. He meant to say and did say that in the <em>future state</em> they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven⁠—which last expression also refers not to an act, or a process, or a brief moment of time, but to a <em>state of being</em>. And what was the force of the argument from the Old Testament? Not that. Abraham and Isaac and Jacob had received or were some thousands of years thereafter to receive bodies into union with their spirits, but simply that they were in <em>existence</em>⁠—which the Sadducees did not believe. <em>This</em> was an argument “touching the Anastasis.” On the other hypothesis of explanation of the language, it certainly would not <em>touch</em> the Sadducees or their case supposed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Dwight (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theology</i>, <abbr>Ser.</abbr> 165) renders <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>, by “ future existence,” and adds, “So far as I have observed it usually denotes <em>our existence beyond the grave</em>.’ Campbell’s translation is, “The same day came Sadducees to him who say that there is no future life.”</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>Acts 23:6; 24:15</p>
					</header>
					<p>“When Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.”</p>
					<p>“And have hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Shall be a resurrection,” <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασιν μέλλειν ἔσεσθαι</i>. It may be worthy of notice in passing that <i xml:lang="el">μέλλειν</i> implies that the Anastasis is that which is “about to be,” and contradicts the common theory. Paul’s “hope” was that the Anastasis was soon to be.</p>
				<p>It should be remembered that the question of the day, as of any importance was, not one of <em>the mode of existence in a future state</em>, but <em>the fact of such state</em>. Paul therefore would not be very likely to allude to a minor point. It would be the primary question of a future existence. The statement of Festus is in support of this position, Acts 25:14⁠–⁠21. There were certain questions of their superstition and of one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed <em>to be alive</em>. If Jesus was alive it would imply that there was a future state. If there was no such future state, then Jesus was not alive. This is Paul’s argument in 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15. This is confirmed by his allusion to the subject in his place before Agrippa, Acts 26:6⁠–⁠8. He is accused because he hopes in the Messiah who was promised to the fathers. And Jesus was that Messiah. He had indeed died, but he had risen again, and had been seen alive after his passion, and in all the vigor of an immortal and spiritual Saviour. He had appeared to him personally, on his way to Damascus, Acts 26:12⁠–⁠18. Why should it be thought a thing incredible that God should raise the dead? And if not, then why not admit the claims to the Messiahship of Jesus? How evident that the question of the reinvestiture of the soul with a body some thousands of years thereafter could not be the matter in hand⁠—the thing signified by the word Paul so often uses⁠—<i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>. How certainly it must, in the use of it in this case, mean <em>existence after death</em>. Again, it was Paul’s <strong>hope</strong>. “Of the <em>hope</em> and resurrection of the dead,” 23:6. “I have <em>hope</em> towards God, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust,” 24:15. What was <em>the</em> hope of Paul? A glorious and blessed future⁠—the <strong>fact</strong>, not that it would be found in this or that <em>method</em>. This whole case in which Paul appears so sublimely, is eviscerated when you make <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> signify the union of the soul with another body at an indefinitely remote period. No; the hope of the gospel is “that blessed hope, even (<i xml:lang="el">καί</i>) the glorious appearing (<i xml:lang="el">ἐπιφάνειαν</i>) of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ” (<abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:18). That rich history found in <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 1:21⁠–⁠24 did not find its source in some philosophical question relating to what should be the modification of the mode of existence that would occur many thousands of years in the future. It was the hope and expectation that “mortality would be swallowed up of life.”</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Philippians 3:20, 21</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἡμῶν γὰρ τὸ πολίτευμα ἐν οὐρανοῖς ὑπάρχει ἐξ οὗ καὶ σωτῆρα ἀπεκδεχόμεθα Κύριον Ἰησοῦν Χριστόν, (21) ὃς μετασχηματίσει τὸ σῶμα τῆς ταπεινώσεως ἡμῶν σύμμορφον τῷ σώματι τῆς δόξης αὐτοῦ, κατὰ τὴν ἐνέργειαν τοῦ δύνασθαι αὐτὸν καὶ ὑποτάξαι αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα.</td>
							<td>For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: (21) Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Looking for the Saviour has beyond question reference to the Parousia. See this text in <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. And the plain and obvious meaning of <abbr>v.</abbr> 21 is, that <em>when</em> Christ shall appear, or come to receive us to the mansions he has prepared, he will effect the change⁠—change the body of our vileness like to the body of his glory, make us like himself. And this likeness is not moral; it relates to the physical (<i xml:lang="el">σῶμα</i>, <em>body</em>). He will, at death, give us a body like to the body of the glorified Man Christ Jesus. This is its plain and obvious meaning.</p>
				<p>And further, Christ is not to give us another body, but to change this body. Paul says in another place (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:44), “There is a natural (<i xml:lang="el">ψυχικόν</i>, <em>animal life</em>) body, and there <em>is</em> (not will be) a spiritual (<i xml:lang="el">πνευματικόν</i>, <em>mind</em> or <em>soul</em>) body.” Although this verb as in the present tense, does not of necessity mean it, yet it favors the hypothesis that there is in the present composition of man a twofold body, the one animated by the animal life, the other by the mind or soul itself. Of course our theories or hypotheses are not taught as doctrine. We <em>teach</em> only what is expressly taught in the Bible. But assuming this hypothesis we may suppose the change at death to be dropping the animal organization, and retaining the more subtle part as adapted to the exigencies of the spirit. This “spiritual” element would, as a consequence of severance from the grosser element, at once develop itself and become invested with new and wonderful powers⁠—as does the animal body at its birth. “We think a careful attention to one’s consciousness will give support to this hypothesis: also the facts of Mesmerism.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">John 5:21⁠–⁠29</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἐγείρει τοὺς νεκροὺς καὶ ζωοποιεῖ, οὕτως καὶ ὁ υἱὸς οὓς θέλει ζωοποιεῖ. (22) οὐδὲ γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ κρίνει οὐδένα, ἀλλὰ τὴν κρίσιν πᾶσαν δέδωκεν τῷ υἱῷ· (23) ἵνα πάντες τιμῶσι τὸν υἱὸν, καθὼς τιμῶσι τὸν πατέρα. ὁ μὴ τιμῶν τὸν υἱὸν, οὐ τιμᾷ τὸν πατέρα τὸν πέμψαντα αὐτόν.</td>
							<td>For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will. (22) For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son; (23) That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father which hath sent him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">(24) Ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ὁ τὸν λόγον μου ἀκούων, καὶ πιστεύων τῷ πέμψαντί με, ἔχει ζωὴν αἰώνιον· καὶ εἰς κρίσιν οὐκ ἔρχεται, ἀλλὰ μεταβέβηκεν ἐκ τοῦ θανάτου εἰς τὴν ζωήν. (25) ἀμὴν ἀμὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἔρχεται ὥρα καὶ νῦν ἐστιν, ὅτε οἱ νεκροὶ ἀκούσουσιν τῆς φωνῆς τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ Θεοῦ, καὶ οἱ ἀκούσαντες ζήσονται. (26) ὥσπερ γὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἔχει ζωὴν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, οὕτως ἔδωκε καὶ τῷ υἱῷ ζωὴν ἔχειν ἐν ἑαυτῷ· (27) καὶ ἐξουσίαν ἔδωκεν αὐτῷ καὶ κρίσιν ποιεῖν, ὅτι υἱὸς ἀνθρώπου ἐστί. (28) μὴ θαυμάζετε τοῦτο· ὅτι ἔρχεται ὥρα ἐν ᾗ πάντες οἱ ἐν τοῖς μνημείοις ἀκούσουσιν τῆς φωνῆς αὐτοῦ, 29 καὶ ἐκπορεύσονται, οἱ τὰ ἀγαθὰ ποιήσαντες, εἰς ἀνάστασιν ζωῆς· οἱ δὲ τὰ φαῦλα πράξαντες, εἰς ἀνάστασιν κρίσεως.</td>
							<td>(24) Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from death unto life. (25) Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live. (26) For as the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; (27) And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. (28) Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, (29) And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>There is in these verses much of the order of modern sermons. The theme is that <em>the Father and the Son are one and equal</em>, <abbr>v.</abbr> 18. This is illustrated by the following facts:⁠—</p>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. As the Father raiseth up athe dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will, <abbr>v.</abbr> 21.</p>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son, <abbr>v.</abbr> 22.</p>
				<p>So that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father, <abbr>v.</abbr> 23.</p>
				<p>The subject and plan of discussion thus stated, the two several heads are resumed and considered more at length.</p>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will.</p>
				<p>By this is meant a moral resurrection. See <abbr>vs.</abbr> 24⁠—26.</p>
				<p>Verse 24 is illustrated by such texts as the following:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>John 3:16. “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>John 6:40, 50⁠–⁠58. “And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.” (50) “This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. (51) I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. (52) The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? (53) Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. (54) Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life: and I will raise him up at the last day. (55) For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. (56) He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. (57) As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father; so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. (58) This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live forever.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>John 8:51. “Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>John 11:25, 26. “Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: (26) And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>John 17:2. “As thou hast given him power over all fiesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Verse 25 is illustrated by the following texts.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>Daniel 12:2. “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Eph.</abbr> 2:1⁠–⁠6. “And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; (2) Wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience: (3) Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfillng the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. (4) But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, (5) Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved), (6) And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Eph.</abbr> 5:14. “Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Col.</abbr> 2:13. “And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Verse 26 is but the iteration, in a little different phraseology, of the first “head” (<abbr>v.</abbr> 21), which he had now explained.</p>
				<p><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son.</p>
				<p>This great truth is explained in verses 27⁠–⁠29.</p>
				<p>Verse 27. The Father hath given him authority (<i xml:lang="el">ἐξουσίαν</i>), even to administer government, because he is a son of man. Daniel had predicted that there should be given to one who, “as a son of man,” came upon the clouds, dominion and glory and a kingdom; and that his authority (<i xml:lang="el">ἐξουσία</i> by the Seventy) should be an everlasting authority. This authority was given to Christ <em>because</em> he was “a son of man.” It <em>became</em> Him by whom are all things in bringing many sons unto glory, to make “a son of man” the Captain of their salvation. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 2:10, 17; 7:26; Luke 24:46. There was a fitness in it. Such a being⁠—God manifest <em>in the flesh</em>⁠—would have a moral power over the fallen race that no other source in the Universe could furnish. Such a being, as our great High-Priest, could, his own self bear our sins in his own body, and make reconciliation for the sins of the people.</p>
				<p>Verses 28, 29. Were his hearers surprised at this statement? He would make a stronger. “The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> “His” is the emphatic word. He that was now before them but a man as they supposed, assured them that not only the government of this world was in his hands, but that his <i xml:lang="el">ἐξουσία</i> (authority) extended to the unseen world.</p>
				<p>All power (<i xml:lang="el">ἐξουσία</i>) in heaven and in earth was to be given into his hands. The dead like the living would be amenable to him, and from him receive their final sentence. He would soon be “on the right hand of God, angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him” (1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 3:22). Verses 28, 29 are evidently designed to explain and illustrate verses 22, 27⁠—that all judgment was commitied unto the Son. Any question relating to the Resurrection was not and could not be under consideration here. By “all that are in the graves” is meant the dead or those in the unseen world.</p>
				<p>Those who are disposed to construe this more literally and apply it to the resurrection of the body at the “end of the world,” will find themselves embarrassed. If any part of <abbr>v.</abbr> 29 can refer to the <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις σώματος</i>, <em>the resurrection of the body</em> (Knapp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Theol.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 616⁠—not a Bible phrase), it would be the coming forth from the graves. But no; they come forth from the graves <i xml:lang="el">εἰς ἀνάστασιν</i>, <em>unto a resurrection</em>. <i xml:lang="el">Εἰς</i> (unto) points to “a <em>state</em> or <em>condition</em> into which one comes after verbs of motion.” For instance, “These shall go away into (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) everlasting punishment.” <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 25:46. So here the dead come forth unto (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) a resurrection⁠—implying that which is distinct from rising from the grave⁠—a <em>state</em> beyond the grave, a future state of being that may be one of happiness or of woe: and which, to be decided by the Son of Man when exalted to the right hand of God. Verse 30, “I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I <em>judge</em>: and my <em>judgment is just</em>,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, shows that “judgment” by the Son is the subject under consideration, and not some minor question relating to the body.</p>
				<p>The Saviour is saying this to show that he is entitled to be honored even as the Father. But in what shines brightest the glory of the Redeemer? Not in the miracles that he wrought, be they great or small⁠—if such a distinction should be made⁠—but in that moral work, by which men that are dead in trespasses and sins are quickened to a life of holiness⁠—in what is done to the moral character, rather than to the material body.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Here the whole Deity is known.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>From John 5:21⁠–⁠29 we learn nothing about the Resurrection in the ordinary use of that word.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>John 11:23⁠–⁠26</p>
					</header>
					<p>“Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. (24) Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. (25) Jesus saith unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: (26) And whosoever liveth and believeth in me, shall never die.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Verse 23. By this language we think Jesus intended to say that he would miraculously restore Lazarus to life. <i xml:lang="el">Ἀναστήσεται</i> (rise again) has often that meaning. This would be to the point in the circumstances. It would imply what was really the purpose of Christ.</p>
				<p>Verse 24. What were the views which Martha designed to express in this language, we cannot know. Jesus had said, <abbr>Chap.</abbr> 6:40, “This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.” Whether Martha understood this correctly, does not appear; but that there was error in her reply would seem probable from the answer which Jesus gave. The language of Martha is not, then, to be regarded as sustaining or militating against any theory on the subject of the Resurrection.</p>
				<p>Verse 25. “I am the resurrection and the life:” I am he who so renews and sanctifies men, that a future state is “life” indeed⁠—a blessed life. There is a resurrection of the unjust; but he that believeth in me though he be dead, will be alive⁠—though his body die, will yet be sustained in a happy existence.</p>
				<p>Verse 26. This is an advance upon the preceding verse. He had said that he who was dead was yet alive. He now says, he who is alive, will <em>never</em> die. The change that will pass upon his physical nature, will but advance his happiness. It will not be death, but life in a higher degree, <em>and that life eternal</em>.</p>
				<p>That Martha should have not only inadequate but erroneous views on the subject of the future state (<i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>) is not surprising. When the favored disciples came down from the mount of transfiguration, Jesus charged them to tell the vision to no man till the Son of Man were risen from the dead. And they reasoned among themselves what the rising from the dead could mean. The erroneous remark of Martha furnished an appropriate occasion for an explanation of the doctrine of the Anastasis. It meant a future life, and to the disciples of Christ it was a happy life⁠—the consequence of the saving work of Christ as a Redeemer. The language of the Saviour forbids the hypothesis that <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> means the raising to life of the dead body at a distant future day. Its import is, that when a man dies as to his body, he is still alive.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:1⁠–⁠4</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Οἴδαμεν γὰρ, ὅτι ἐὰν ἡ ἐπίγειος ἡμῶν οἰκία τοῦ σκήνους καταλυθῇ, οἰκοδομὴν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἔχομεν, οἰκίαν ἀχειροποίητον, αἰώνιον ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς. (2) Καὶ γὰρ ἐν τούτῳ στενάζομεν, τὸ οἰκητήριον ἡμῶν τὸ ἐξ οὐρανοῦ ἐπενδύσασθαι ἐπιποθοῦντες· (3) εἴγε καὶ ἐνδυσάμενοι, οὐ γυμνοὶ εὑρεθησόμεθα. (4) καὶ γὰρ οἱ ὄντες ἐν τῷ σκήνει στενάζομεν βαρούμενοι· ἐφ᾽ ᾧ οὐ θέλομεν ἐκδύσασθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπενδύσασθαι, ἵνα καταποθῇ τὸ θνητὸν ὑπὸ τῆς ζωῆς.</td>
							<td>For we know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. (2) For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven. (3) If so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked. (4) For, we that are in this tabernacle, do groan, being burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>On our theory this language is of most obvious interpretation, while on the common hypothesis it is attended with difficulty. The Apostle in the preceding chapter had spoken of his very great sufferings for Christ’s sake. But they were advancing his preparation for heaven, while his views were not of things seen and temporal, but of things not seen and eternal. He expands this last idea in the verses under consideration. Though his body, as the earthly house in which his spirit dwelt, was destroyed, he had a better in heaven, made of God, and eternal (<abbr>v.</abbr> 1). He was more than reconciled to the destruction of the present body⁠—the termination of the present mode of being⁠—he desired to be clothed upon with his spiritual body (<abbr>v.</abbr> 2); and “since also” (<i xml:lang="el">εἴγε καὶ</i>⁠—Robinson⁠—Liddell and Scott), such body awaited him immediately at death, he should not therefore be found naked (<abbr>v.</abbr> 3). He did not wish to disparage his present body, so fearfully and wonderfully made; he did not desire to be unclothed, as it was a privilege to live and act and enjoy in the present methods. But as the future was so immeasurably in advance of the present, he could but desire to be clothed upon with his spiritual body⁠—to have mortality and its ills swallowed up of life (<abbr>v.</abbr> 4).</p>
				<p>All this language proceeds upon the assumption that the spiritual body will succeed immediately to the present animal organization. Indeed <abbr>v.</abbr> 3 directly and positively denies any “separate state.” The soul is not to be left naked, but to be clothed upon with the spiritual body.</p>
				<p>As confirmatory of the interpretation we have given of the language of the Apostle, we refer the reader to Locke’s view of it quoted in <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 64. He saw that Paul’s language demanded an interpretation which connected immediately the putting off of the present, and the putting on of the spiritual body. Therefore, Paul must be writing under the <em>erroneous</em> opinion that the Coming of the Lord was near, and himself was to be a participator in the great transaction. But Paul, after all, was not in so great error as some interpreters have supposed, nor will his language need to be subjected to any such strain, as has been thought the condition of reducing it to harmony with fact.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">John 6:39, 40</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Τοῦτο δέ ἐστι τὸ θέλημα τοῦ πέμψαντός με πατρὸς, ἵνα πᾶν ὃ δέδωκέ μοι, μὴ ἀπολέσω ἐξ αὐτοῦ, ἀλλὰ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸ τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ. (40) τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι τὸ θέλημα τοῦ πέμψαντός με, ἵνα πᾶς ὁ θεωρῶν τὸν υἱὸν καὶ πιστεύων εἰς αὐτὸν, ἔχῃ ζωὴν αἰώνιον, καὶ ἀναστήσω αὐτὸν ἐγὼ τῇ ἐσχάτῃ ἡμέρᾳ.</td>
							<td>And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. (40) And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Verse 39. That of all which he hath given me I shall lose nothing, but shall anastasize it in the last day. So in <abbr>v.</abbr> 40; I will anastasize him in the last day. Here the antithesis to being lost, is to be anastasized by Christ. And having everlasting life is equivalent to being anastasized as Christ’s. A man is saved in this world when he becomes Christ’s: he will find salvation everlasting only as he shall be with and united to Christ in the future world. It should be remembered that this was said at a time when the fact of a future state was a debated question: and this language of the Saviour was of the utmost importance as settling it. But can we, in such circumstances, and in such a connection, suppose the Saviour would speak of the philosophy of a future state?⁠—of the mode of constitutional being that shall ultimately and many thousand years hence belong to that state? To us nothing seems less probable; we had almost said, more impossible.</p>
				<p>And if the reader will look at the context, he will find that the great subject under consideration forbids us to understand the language of our text otherwise than as interpreted above. Christ was telling the Jews what was his mission into the world. It was to save it; to give to men everlasting life. He was the bread of life: he that eateth of this bread “shall <em>live</em> forever”⁠—shall be anastasized, and live on a blessed life beyond the grave.</p>
				<p>By “the last day,” as it occurs in these verses, also in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 44 and 54, is to be understood the day of death.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">1 Corinthians 6:14</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ὁ δὲ θεὸς καὶ τὸν κύριον ἤγειρε, καὶ ἡμᾶς ἐξεγερεῖ διὰ τῆς δυνάμεως αὐτοῦ.</td>
							<td>And God hath both raised up the Lord, and will also raise up us by his own power.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>God hath both anastasized the Lord, and will also anastasize us by his power.</p>
				<p>The verb in this case is <i xml:lang="el">ἤγειρε</i>. It is equivalent to <i xml:lang="el">ἀνέστησε</i>. These verbs are used interchangeably. Compare Acts 2:32 and 3:26 with 3:15 and 4:10. In 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15, the abstract is represented by <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>, and the concrete by <i xml:lang="el">ἐγείρω</i>.</p>
				<p>God will raise up <em>us</em>, not our bodies. The term is applied to the whole man. Will <em>he</em> live and be blessed after death?⁠—is the question answered in the text. The body is to be destroyed, <abbr>v.</abbr> 13. If the Anastasis had any special reference to the <em>body</em>, it would have been made prominent here. The body is the subject of remark. It had just been said that it was to be destroyed. Christians were cautioned against the abuse of its functions. If the Anastasis was the reviving of the body, it would seem there must have been an allusion to this fact.</p>
				<p>The connections of this verse force it upon our theory of interpretation. Christians are dissuaded from the abuse of their bodies: these bodies were for the Lord. Themselves who possessed them were the Lord’s, <em>and were to be his forever</em>. There was a future and everlasting state, and of such importance, that everything of time should be subordinated to it.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>1 John 3:2</p>
					</header>
					<p>“Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“We shall see him as he is.” See John 14:3. “If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also:” and 17:24. “Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; <em>that they may behold my glory</em>, which thou hast given me.” The time referred to in both these texts is death, when the believer enters heaven. To “behold his glory,” and to “see him as he is,” are one and the same thing. But this is to be when he shall “appear.”</p>
				<p>There is an inference from the fact that we shall see him as he is, namely, that we shall be like him. We cannot else see him as he is. This has reference to the state of being, constitutionally. The language, “It doth not yet appear what we shall be,” must have this import. If the reference were to a moral likeness, this would not be true. We do know what we are to be morally. We are to be perfectly holy. What is implied in the new mode of being⁠—in the development of the spiritual body, and the exercise of its functions, we do not know. Hence we cannot conceive of Christ as he now is, constitutionally. A person with but a part of the senses⁠—Laura Bridgeman for example⁠—cannot conceive of persons as they are, who have all the senses. So of Christ: the mode of being that is his must be ours before we can see him as he is. He must “change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.” Then we shall know as we are known. But this vision is to be at death. Therefore the possession of a spiritual body will be at death. To be in heaven will imply the functions of that body. The “change,” then, will take place at death.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Matthew 27:50⁠–⁠53</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ὁ δὲ Ἰησοῦς πάλιν κράξας φωνῇ μεγάλῃ ἀφῆκε τὸ πνεῦμα. (51) Καὶ ἰδοὺ, τὸ καταπέτασμα τοῦ ναοῦ ἐσχίσθη εἰς δύο ἀπ’ ἄνωθεν ἕως κάτω εἰς δύο ἀπὸ ἄνωθεν ἕως κάτω· καὶ ἡ γῆ ἐσείσθη, καὶ αἱ πέτραι ἐσχίσθησαν· (52) καὶ τὰ μνημεῖα ἀνεῴχθησαν, καὶ πολλὰ σώματα τῶν κεκοιμημένων ἁγίων ἠγέρθη, (53) καὶ ἐξελθόντες ἐκ τῶν μνημείων μετὰ τὴν ἔγερσιν αὐτοῦ, εἰσῆλθον εἰς τὴν ἁγίαν πόλιν, καὶ ἐνεφανίσθησαν πολλοῖς.</td>
							<td>Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. (51) And behold the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; (52) And the graves were opened, and many bodies of the saints which slept, arose, (53) And came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>We refer to this language, not because we propose to explain all the facts here related, but just to show that so far as we can understand it, our theory is sustained by it. What are these facts? They do not, nor can they all be made to appear in an English translation. “Bodies” in <abbr>v.</abbr> 52 is not the subject of “came” in <abbr>v.</abbr> 53: <i xml:lang="el">σώματα</i> (bodies) is in the neuter gender, while <i xml:lang="el">ἐξελθόντες</i> (participle; <em>came</em> or <em>having come</em>) is masculine, and refers to the persons whose bodies had been raised. The facts, then, are these: On the afternoon of the sixth day of the week, when Jesus gave up the ghost, the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose. On the morning of the first day of the succeeding week, Christ rose from the dead and came out of his grave. “After his resurrection” the persons whose bodies had been raised three days before, came out of their graves, and went into the holy city and appeared unto many. What is meant by the raising of the bodies when the persons themselves did not come out of their graves till the third day? Was this a revivification of the former animal body, so that the persons were known by those acquainted with them when living? And if so, what became of these bodies? Did they again die? If it were only the spiritual body that was raised, they could not have <em>appeared</em> to the senses of the living. This is implied in the very word “spiritual” (<i xml:lang="el">πνευματικών</i>). Why were they raised? And why is nothing said of it by the other Evangelists? And why do not the Apostles refer to it in their epistles, and especially why did not Paul in 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15?</p>
				<p>Our own opinion⁠—we will not be pledged to prove its correctness⁠—is this: The raising of these saints was the revivification of their animal bodies, and was miraculous; as was also the case of the Saviour. And the design of it was the same as the raising and manifestation to the senses of Christ⁠—to aid the men of that day to the practical conviction that Christ and also his disciples were “alive after their passion”⁠—that death did not destroy <em>the man</em>. It was, by a miracle, to prove to men the great fact of the Anastasis.</p>
				<p>The verb rendered “appeared” is often used to imply representations made by the use of words. See Acts 23:15, 22; 24:1; 25:2. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 11:14. It may be, that they not only appeared as alive after they had been for some time dead; but also by verbal representations taught the fact of their life after death. They may have said, “We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen.”</p>
				<p>The phrase, “appeared unto many,” although it does not directly assert it, must yet be understood as implying that they were in the holy city but a brief period. They were there long enough to be seen by many. Had they become permanent residents, and after years of life died as did others, this phraseology would not have been employed. They doubtless soon disappeared; in what way we are not informed.</p>
				<p>These facts, then, support directly our theory of interpretation. They were designed to show that there is life beyond the grave⁠—what Paul proved in 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15, and called the Anastasis. But where can these facts find a place on the common hypothesis, and to what do they stand in any relations of subserviency, logical or moral?</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Resurrection of Christ</h3>
				<p>It is, as we understand it, the commonly received doctrine that Christ rose from the dead bodily⁠—that the very body which was laid in the grave was raised, so that the place which was occupied by it was left vacant: that he was “the first begotten from the dead” (<abbr>Col.</abbr> 1:18), “the first to rise from the dead” (Acts 26:23); and that therefore the very bodies of his followers⁠—the harvest of which he was the first-fruit⁠—will, in like manner, rise from the dead.</p>
				<p>What are the facts in relation to Christ?</p>
				<p>He died; was buried; his body did not see corruption; it was miraculously revivified on the third day⁠—the wounds upon his side and hands yet unhealed and open; he appeared to his friends, and suddenly and miraculously vanished out of their sight; he ate and drank, and spoke and walked; and finally, in a miraculous manner, rose up bodily⁠—the same body so far as the disciples could see, in which he had appeared after his resurrection.</p>
				<p>Now it might be urged against the above statement of doctrine, that Christ was not the first instance of a dead body revivified. The son of the Shunammite, the son of the widow of Nain, and Lazarus, are instances.</p>
				<p>It was not the first instance of a “change,” and of a spiritual body. It is supposed by those who entertain the common opinion of the Resurrection, that Enoch and Elijah are possessed of their spiritual bodies⁠—that they, by their translation, experienced a change like that which all will experience at the “end of the world.” On either hypothesis, then, Christ is not the first in the order of time that rose from the dead. And then, the case of Christ and that of other men is dissimilar. His body, as was predicted by David, did not experience corruption as ours does. And if we consider the Resurrection as referring to the body, a resurrection to him and to us is not the same thing. We do not succeed to him as the same in kind. And he therefore cannot be the “first” with reference to us. He is as unlike us in the circumstances of his death, as in those of his birth. Both to him were altogether peculiar.</p>
				<p>But let us examine the texts above referred to.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Acts 26:23</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Εἰ παθητὸς ὁ Χριστός, εἰ πρῶτος ἐξ ἀναστάσεως νεκρῶν φῶς μέλλει καταγγέλλειν τῷ λαῷ καὶ τοῖς ἔθνεσι.</td>
							<td>That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Paul had preached only such things as he had learned from the Prophets and from Moses (<abbr>v.</abbr> 22)⁠—<em>That the Messiah was to be a sufferer, and that he</em>, <strong>The First</strong> <em>from the time of his anastasis, was to proclaim light</em>⁠—the light of truth and of life⁠—<em>to the people, and to the Gentiles</em>.</p>
				<p>The phrase relating to the Anastasis is the same as in <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4, where Christ is said to be constituted the Son of God in power <em>from the time of his resurrection from the dead</em>. Peter (Acts 2:32, 33) presents the same thought. This same Jesus hath God anastasized.⁠ ⁠… Being therefore <em>exalted to the right hand of God</em>, and having received the promise of the Spirit, hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Here Christ is represented as placed in power (<i xml:lang="el">τῇ δεξιᾷ</i>) from the time of his anastasis. From that time he was <strong>first</strong>, “Head over all things.”</p>
				<p>Christ is “first” as qualified for the work of giving light to the world,.the work of saving men. The reference, then, must be to his character as a great Saviour, and not to an incident in his history, which could in no way qualify him for that work.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Colossians 1:18</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Καὶ αὐτός ἐστιν ἡ κεφαλὴ τοῦ σώματος τῆς ἐκκλησίας· ὅς ἐστιν ἀρχή, πρωτότοκος ἐκ τῶν νεκρῶν, ἵνα γένηται ἐν πᾶσιν αὐτὸς πρωτεύων.</td>
							<td>And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>This should be seen in its connections. See <abbr>vs.</abbr> 15⁠–⁠19.</p>
				<p>The object of the writer is to glorify Christ, and to employ those terms which would express, in the most emphatic manner, his dignity. It were entirely out of place, then, in this connection, to introduce the fact that Christ was first in the order of time in rising from the dead. The term is one of dignity. Not only is Christ the Highest in the spiritual world or among the dead, but he is the “firstborn of every creature” (<abbr>v.</abbr> 15). So in <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 1:5, Christ is the First-begotten of the dead, and first in the spiritual world, he is also Prince (<i xml:lang="el">ἄρχων</i>) of the kings of the earth.</p>
				<p>We come to the conclusion, then, that “First” and “First-begotten” are designations of honor, and have not the slightest bearing on the question of the Resurrection.</p>
				<p>By the “resurrection” of Christ is meant the great fact that he is “<strong>alive after his passion</strong>” (<i xml:lang="el">ζῶντα μετὰ τὸ παθεῖν αὐτόν</i>, <em>living after he had died</em>); including also, as connected with his transition to a higher state of being, his official exaltation to the Throne of Grace⁠—“Head over all things to the Church.”</p>
				<p>The reader is requested carefully to examine the following texts as sustaining this position. Very few of them make any allusion to the revivification of the body of Christ, or to any question relating to the body. That God raised or anastasized Christ, is as much as to say that he was made a glorious Saviour, able to save to the uttermost. And to make the anastasis of Christ or that of his disciples relate to a question of corporeity, is infinitely to belittle the subject⁠—is to take its very soul from much of the gospel of Christ.</p>
				<p>These texts are too numerous to be transcribed. And, too, they should be seen in their connections. To quote all that bears on this point would be to transfer to these pages much of the New Testament.</p>
				<p>Acts 1:3. Mark 16:11. Luke 24:23. Acts 25:19. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 1:18; 2:8.</p>
				<p>Acts 1:22; 2:30⁠–⁠33, 36; 3:15, 16, 26; 4:2, 10, 38; 5:30, 31; 10:40⁠–⁠43; 13:30⁠–⁠39; 17:3, 18, 31. <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 4:24, 25; 6:4⁠–⁠11; 7:4; 8:34; 10:9. 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 6:14 (“us,” not our bodies). 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 4:14. <abbr>Gal.</abbr> 1:1: <abbr>Eph.</abbr> 1:20⁠–⁠23. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:10, 11. <abbr>Col.</abbr> 2:12; 3:1. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:10. 1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 1:3, 21; 3:21, 22.</p>
				<p>The following as specimens of a reference of the same general kind, but in different phraseology, may explain and confirm the interpretation given to the preceding. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 2:8⁠–⁠11. 1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 3:16. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 7:25; 8:1; 9:12, 24; 10:12; 12:2.</p>
				<p>We propose to the reader that he shall attempt to read the texts above referred to, attaching to “resurrection” or its equivalent phrase, the idea of a union of the soul to its body, and make them significant and their connection harmonious. We think the attempt rigidly made, will convert the operator.</p>
				<p>Since writing the above, we have met with the following from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Spurgeon’s Sermons</i>, Second Series. We do not refer to this author as authority in either logic or exegesis, but as furnishing indirectly and without design, an invincible argument in support of our position. It is the opening paragraph in Sermon <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262⁠–⁠264. Text, Acts 24:15, “There shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.”</p>
				<p>“Reflecting the other day upon the sad state of the churches at the present moment, I was led to look back to apostolic times, and to consider wherein the preaching of the present day differed from the preaching of the apostles. I remarked the vast difference in their style from the set and formal oratory of the present age. I remarked that the Apostles did not take a text when they preached, nor did they confine themselves to one subject, much less to any place of worship; but I find that they stood up in any place and declared from the fullness of their heart what they knew of Jesus Christ. But the main difference I observed was in the <em>subjects</em> of their preaching. Surprised I was when I discovered that the very staple of the preaching of the Apostles was the resurrection of the dead. I found myself to have been preaching the doctrine of the grace of God; to have been upholding free election; to have been leading the people of God, as well as I was enabled, into the deep things of his word; but I was surprised to find that I had not been copying the apostolic fashion half as nearly as I might have done. The Apostles, when they preached, always testified concerning the resurrection of Jesus, and the consequent resurrection of the dead. It appears that the alpha and omega of their gospel was the testimony that Jesus Christ died and rose again from the dead according to the Scriptures. When they chose another Apostle in the room of Judas, who had become apostate (Acts 1:22), they said, ‘One must be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection;’ so that the very office of an Apostle was to be a witness of the resurrection. And well did they fulfil their office. When Peter stood up before the multitude, he declared unto them that ‘David spoke of the resurrection of Christ’ When Peter and John were taken before the council, the great cause of their arrest was that the rulers were grieved ‘because they taught the people, and preached through Jesus Christ the resurrection from the dead.’ (Acts 4:2.) When they were set free, after having been examined, it is said, ‘With great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; and great grace was upon them all.’ (Acts 4:33.) It was this which stirred the curiosity of the Athenians when Paul preached among them. ‘They said, he seemeth to be a setter-forth of strange gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection of the dead.’ And this moved the laughter of the Areopagites, for when he spoke of the resurrection of the dead, ‘some mocked, and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter.’ Truly did Paul say, when he stood before the council of the Pharisees and Sadducees, ‘Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am called in question.’ And equally truly did he constantly assert, ‘If Christ be not risen from the dead, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is vain, and ye are yet in your sins.’ The resurrection of Jesus and the resurrection of the righteous is a doctrine which we believe, but which we too seldom preach or care to read about. Though I have inquired of several booksellers for a book specially upon the subject of the resurrection, I have not yet been able to purchase one of any sort whatever; and when I turned to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Owen’s works, which are a most invaluable storehouse of divine knowledge, containing much that is valuable on almost every subject, I could find, even there, scarcely more than the slightest mention of the resurrection. It has been set down as a well-known truth, and therefore has never been discussed. Heresies have not risen up respecting it; it would almost have been a mercy if there had been, for whenever a truth is contested⁠—by heretics, the orthodox fight strongly for it, and the pulpit resounds with it every day. I am persuaded, however, that there is much power in this doctrine; and if I preach it this morning you will see that God will own the apostolic preaching, and there will be conversions. I intend putting it to the test now to see whether there be not something which we cannot perceive at present in the resurrection of the dead, which is capable of moving the hearts of men and bringing them into subjection to the gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”</p>
				<p>Two or three things are noticeable in this extract. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spurgeon from his own statement seems never to have thought much on the subject of the Resurrection. And he is of opinion that others have thought as little. Not a book to be found on the subject! Neither himself nor others have preached the Resurrection. Apostles preached it. It was their constant theme: and in it was found the power of God to salvation. Sinners were converted by it. And the inference is that there must be somehow a “power in this doctrine.” “If I preach it this morning, you will see that God will own <em>the apostolic preaching</em>, and there will be conversions.” The power of the doctrine was to him a mystery. But there must be a power in it which we “cannot perceive at present.” No wonder he could not perceive the philosophy of apostolic success. No wonder he could not see <em>how</em> there could be any great moral power in a mere circumstance relating to the mode of our being in some remote period in eternity; or <em>why</em> this fact should be so prominent in the preaching of the Apostles.</p>
				<p>Why did he not, for a moment, listen to that reason which God has given us, and <em>know</em> that what is now the doctrine of the Resurrection, according to his own definitions, could have no such power for the conversion of men to God; and then infer that the Anastasis of the Apostles must have been a very different doctrine? And surely if the subject has been studied as little as he represents, neither he nor any other man should be very tenacious of his present opinion. Our author’s representations do certainly create a very strong presumption in favor of “a more excellent way” as yet to be learned by the modern church.</p>
				<p>And it does seem to us, that even from the most superficial perusal of the Scriptures on the subject, it must be evident from the use which the Apostles made of the Anastasis, that it is <em>not</em> the modern doctrine of the Resurrection. There <em>is</em>, there <em>can be</em> no such power in that doctrine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spurgeon thinks there must be “something which we cannot perceive at present.” Not so: we <em>can</em> perceive and know that there can be no such power. If the human reason does not <em>know</em> that, it knows nothing; and absurdity is a word that has no appropriate place in the human vocabulary.</p>
				<p>And, with all respect to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Spurgeon, we must say, that when we read the sermon, in which he “put this doctrine to the test,” and laid himself out to possess it of the power of “apostolic preaching,” the impression upon our mind was that of the serioludicrous. And, we may add, we doubt if the expectations of the preacher were realized wiih reference to the conversion of the hearers.</p>
				<p>And, to pass from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">S.</abbr> to a thought that may be expressed in this connection, as akin to what we have been saying, What was the burden of the farewell address of the Saviour? This: Though I am about to die, <em>I shall stiil be alive</em>, and will bless you; and you are to believe in me as thus alive and thus able to bless. Indeed, I shall be able to bless you more than I can now; so that it is expedient for you that I go away. And, moreover, you will soon come and be with me and beheld my glory.</p>
				<p>Now was not <em>this</em> the subject of the preaching of these disciples after the day of Pentecost? He was alive after his passion; Him hath God exalted; He it is that sheds forth this Spirit which is in the midst of you; He it is that imparts to us the power to work miracles. He is alive forevermore; and not only so, but he is exalted to be a Prince and Saviour, to give repentance and remission of sins. He had said to them, “You believe in God, believe also in me.” They did now believe in him, and in him, though now they saw him not, yet believing, they rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory. “Jesus and the Resurrection” was <em>Jesus and Life beyond the grave⁠—life everlasting</em>.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-4-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>1 Corinthians 15</p>
				</header>
				<p>President Dwight in his sermon on the Resurrection has the following truthful remarks. “The subject of this chapter, is the <i xml:lang="el">Ἀνάστασις</i>, <em>or future Existence of man</em>. This word is commonly, but often erroneously, rendered <em>Resurrection</em>. So far as I have observed, it usually denotes <em>our existence beyond the grave</em>. Its original and literal meaning is <em>to stand up, or to stand again</em>. As <em>standing</em> is the appropriate posture of <em>life, consciousness, and activity</em>; and <em>lying down</em> the appropriate posture of <em>the dead, the unconscious</em>, and <em>the inactive</em>; this word is not unnaturally employed to denote the future state of spirits, who are living, conscious, active beings. Many passages of Scripture would. have been rendered more intelligible, and the thoughts contained in them more just, and impressive, had this word been translated agreeably to its real meaning. This observation will be sufficiently illustrated by a recurrence to that remarkable passage, which contains the dispute between our Saviour and the Sadducees. <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 22:23. <em>Then came to him</em>, says the Evangelist, <em>the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection</em>: <i xml:lang="el">μὴ εἶναι ἀνάστασιν</i>, <em>that there ts no future state</em>, or <em>no future existence of mankind</em>. The objection which they bring to Christ against the doctrine of a future state, is founded upon the Jewish law of marriage, which required, that a surviving brother should marry the widow of a brother deceased. In conformity to this law, they declare seven brothers to have married, successively, one wife; who survived them all. They then ask, <em>Whose wife shall she be in the resurrection?</em> <i xml:lang="el">ἐν τῇ ἀναστάσει</i>; <em>in the future state</em>? They could not suppose, that she would be any man’s wife in the resurrection: a momentary event; and of such a nature as to forbid even the supposition, that the relations of the present life could be of the least possible importance, or be regarded with the least possible attention, during its transitory existence. Our Saviour answered them, <em>In the Resurrection</em>, or as it should be rendered, <em>In the future state, they neither marry nor are given in marriage; but are as the Angels of God in Heaven. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that, which was spoken unto you by God</em>; or as it ought to be rendered, <em>Have ye not read that, which was spoken unto you by God, concerning the future existence of those who are dead, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.</em> This passage, were we at any loss concerning the meaning of the word <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>, determines it beyond a dispute. The proof, that there is an <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> of the dead, alleged by our Saviour, is the declaration of God to <em>Moses, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob</em>; and the irresistible truth, <em>that God is not the God of the dead, but of the living</em>. The consequence, as everyone who reads the Bible knows, is, that <em>Abraham, Isaac</em>, and <em>Jacob</em>, were living at the time when this declaration was made. Those who die, therefore, live after they are dead, and this future life is the <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>, concerning which there was so much debate between the <em>Pharisees</em> and <em>Sadducees</em>; which is proved by our Saviour in this passage; and which is universally denoted by this term throughout the New Testament. Nothing is more evident, than that <em>Abraham, Isaac</em>, and <em>Jacob</em>, had not risen from the dead; and that the declaration concerning them is, therefore, no proof of the resurrection. But it is certain, that they were living beings; and, therefore, this passage is a complete proof, that mankind live after Death.</p>
				<p>“The appropriate Greek word for Resurrection is “<i xml:lang="el">Ἔγερσις</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> as in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 27:52, 53. <em>Many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after his Resurrection</em>; <i xml:lang="el">μετὰ τὴν ἔγερσιν αὐτοῦ</i>.</p>
				<p>“The <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> is the thing mentioned, as having been denied by some of the <em>Corinthian</em> Christians. See verse 12th of the context. <em>How say some among you, that there is no resurrection</em>, no future life, or existence, <em>of the dead</em>? A person who reads the Epistles to the <em>Corinthians</em> with reference to the object, will easily perceive, that there was at least one heretical teacher at the head of the faction in the <em>Corinthian</em> Church, who refused submission to the authority of the Apostle. This man seems evidently to have been a <em>Jew</em>; and was most probably a <em>Sadducee</em>; as he brought over several members of this church to the great <em>Sadducean</em> error⁠—the denial of a future state. To remove this error from that church, and to prevent its existence ever afterwards, was obviously the design of <em><abbr>St.</abbr> Paul</em> in writing this chapter. Accordingly, he shows its absurdity in the most triumphant manner, in the first thirty-four verses; and, with equal success elucidates, and proves, the contrary doctrine. In the remainder of the discourse, he dwells extensively on the nature of the body with which those who are dead will be invested at the final day; declares the change which those who are living at that time will experience; and concludes with a song of triumph over Death and <em>Hades</em>, and a solemn exhortation to Christians steadfastly to abound in the service of God.”</p>
				<p>We are happy to find ourselves sustained in the opinions we are about to express, by so illustrious a name.</p>
				<p>We approach this chapter with reverence, with gratitude, with joy. It presents, in all the clearness of day, the subject of the Anastasis and the Resurrection. And we shall find it sustaining⁠—demonstrating the hypothesis on which we have thus far proceeded in our exegesis.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 3, 4</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Παρέδωκα γὰρ ὑμῖν ἐν πρώτοις, ὃ καὶ παρέλαβον, ὅτι Χριστὸς ἀπέθανεν ὑπὲρ τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν ἡμῶν, κατὰ τὰς γραφὰς· (4) καὶ ὅτι ἐτάφη, καὶ ὅτι ἐγήγερται τῇ τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ κατὰ τὰς γραφὰς.</td>
							<td>For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures: (4) And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Christ actually died and was buried. It was not a case of asphyxia. If, then, he was afterward alive, it implied an anastasis. David had said of the Messiah, “Thou wilt not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption: thou wilt shew me the path of life ” (<abbr>Ps.</abbr> 16:10, 11). That is, Christ’s body should not decay, but be restored to life. This was literally fulfilled. He appeared and was recognized by his friends as in the same animal organization⁠—“flesh and bones.” He was handled by Thomas: he ate and drank (Luke 24:39⁠–⁠43. John 10:27. Acts 10:41), which he could not have done in a spiritual and glorified body. “Meats” and “the belly” do not belong to the spiritual body and the heavenly state. “God shall destroy both it and them.”</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 5⁠–⁠8</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Καὶ ὅτι ὤφθη Κηφᾷ, εἶτα τοῖς δώδεκα. (6) ἔπειτα ὤφθη ἐπάνω πεντακοσίοις ἀδελφοῖς ἐφάπαξ, ἐξ ὧν οἱ πλείους μένουσιν ἕως ἄρτι, τινὲς δὲ καὶ ἐκοιμήθησαν. (7) ἔπειτα ὤφθη Ἰακώβῳ, εἶτα τοῖς ἀποστόλοις πᾶσιν. 8 Ἔσχατον δὲ πάντων, ὡσπερεὶ τῷ ἐκτρώματι, ὤφθη κἀμοί.</td>
							<td>And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: (6) After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep. (7) After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles. (8) And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>These verses show that he was seen by competent witnesses, and in sufficient numbers. This proves that he was alive after his passion, but touches not the question of a spiritual body.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 12⁠–⁠16</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Εἰ δὲ Χριστὸς κηρύσσεται ὅτι ἐκ νεκρῶν ἐγήγερται, πῶς λέγουσι τινες ἐν ὑμῖν, ὅτι ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν οὐκ ἔστιν; (13) εἰ δὲ ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν οὐκ ἔστιν, οὐδὲ Χριστὸς ἐγήγερται· (14) εἰ δὲ Χριστὸς οὐκ ἐγήγερται, κενὸν ἄρα καὶ τὸ κήρυγμα ἡμῶν, κενὴ δὲ καὶ ἡ πίστις ὑμῶν. (15) εὑρισκόμεθα δὲ καὶ ψευδομάρτυρες τοῦ Θεοῦ, ὅτι ἐμαρτυρήσαμεν κατὰ τοῦ Θεοῦ ὅτι ἤγειρε τὸν Χριστὸν, ὃν οὐκ ἤγειρεν, εἴπερ ἄρα νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται· (16) εἰ γὰρ νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται, οὐδὲ Χριστὸς ἐγήγερται.</td>
							<td>Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? (13) But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen. (14) And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. (15) Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. (16) For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>On the common hypothesis the logic of the Apostle would be this: If it is preached and is true that the animal body of Christ was revivified and reinhabited by his soul; then it will follow that at some remote period in the future, spiritual bodies⁠—perhaps not one particle of the material the same as that of their former bodies⁠—will be given to the dead, and by them inhabited:⁠—a perfect non sequitur. Suppose we reject the belief of spiritual bodies. The resurrection and post mortem history of Christ might have been the same as now. The great object of the appearing of Christ to his disciples after his death was unquestionably to secure upon their unmetaphysical minds a deep and practical conviction that he was still alive; and, too, not a mere ghost of scarcely actual being, but that he lived a vigorous, glorious life, and would be to them an actual and available and present Saviour⁠—as he had promised them just before his death. He was alive forevermore; and had the keys of hell and of death; and the key of David, and he opened and no man shut, and shut and no man opened. He was alive forevermore; able to save to the uttermost. These convictions secured by the facts of his peculiar post mortem life⁠—being present and vanishing, and reappearing and vanishing again, showing that though unseen he was yet present⁠—he then might have retired in spirit from this world in a method unrecognized by sense. Or, he might even, to impress upon their minds that he was going to heaven to be seen no more, have gone up as he did in fact in palpable manifestation, a cloud receiving him out of their sight. The animal body had answered its purposes, and the spirit might now take its departure into the spiritual world to live forever a spirit without a body. And the palpable manifestations of Christ after his death prove nothing in relation to a spiritual body or the manner of our future existence.</p>
				<p>But let us find some logic in this not only learned and acute but inspired man. If it be preached that Christ was alive after he had died, <i xml:lang="el">ζῶντα μετὰ τὸ παθεῖν αὐτόν</i> (Acts 1:3), was “he that liveth and was dead and is alive forevermore,” so that death did not affect the existence or vigor of his mind, only to enhance it; then it is a fair inference that the death of other men leaves the spirit in life and vigor. And so the converse of this. If the soul of man does not survive the body, then the soul of Jesus did not survive his body: and⁠—tremendous inference!⁠—the great doctrine of an unseen Saviour is but a fable, and our preaching is vain, and your faith is also vain. More than that; we are found false witnesses of God, for we have asserted what could not be, and therefore is not true.</p>
				<p>And we must not omit to notice that Paul in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 12⁠–⁠15 sweeps to the winds the commonly received notion of a miraculous resurrection. The whole force of the Apostle’s argument in these verses rests upon the assumption that the Anastasis <em>follows the present life by a law of nature</em>⁠—by an established order of antecedent and consequent. It were no logical inference, that because <em>by a miracle</em> Christ was alive after the death of the body, therefore other men would be found so. And no more logical the inference, that if by a miracle, or rather miracles innumerable, the souls of men are to be reunited to a spiritual body at a remote future time, therefore Christ was alive after he had died; or that he was possessed of his animal body resuscitated; or that he had a spiritual body. It does not follow that because a miracle has been wrought in one case, it will therefore be wrought in other and similar cases. It were as logical to infer the resurrection of all the future dead from the miraculous restoration to life of Lazarus.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 17⁠–⁠19</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Εἰ δὲ Χριστὸς οὐκ ἐγήγερται, ματαία ἡ πίστις ὑμῶν, ἔτι ἐστὲ ἐν ταῖς ἁμαρτίαις ὑμῶν· (18) ἄρα καὶ οἱ κοιμηθέντες ἐν Χριστῷ ἀπώλοντο. (19) Εἰ ἐν τῇ ζωῇ ταύτῃ ἠλπικότες ἐσμὲν ἐν Χριστῷ μόνον, ἐλεεινότεροι πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἐσμέν.</td>
							<td>And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. (18) Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. (19) If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The Apostle proceeds to draw other inferences from the assumption that Christ is not raised. The first is, “Ye are yet in your sins.” Paul tells us elsewhere that Christ was raised for our justification (<abbr>Rom.</abbr> 4:25). This must mean that after death he was acting in heaven as our Mediator and Intercessor, urging the merits of his sufferings and death in our behalf, and securing thus our justification. But what has this function to do with the fact that his spirit was or was not possessed of a spiritual body? Nothing. But if Christ is not <em>alive</em>, and in the exercise of his prerogatives as a Mediator, it is a vital fact.</p>
				<p>Faith in Christ implies also a reliance on his grace⁠—his providence and Spirit for sanctification and perseverance unto the end. But this grace may come from Christ alike if he have or have not a spiritual body. But if he have no existence as an unseen Saviour, the Christian may well despair of reaching heaven.</p>
				<p>Verse 18 is a second apodosis from the protasis in <abbr>v.</abbr> 16, “If the dead rise not.” (The first, “Then is not Christ raised,” has been already considered.) The inference is that the dead, who have died in hope of a future life through Christ, are perished. But how so if the question of resurrection is one of the possession at a future time of a spiritual body? Are the saints not happy now as mere spirits? Are not, on the common theory, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob now in a happy heaven? And if they are not hereafter to receive spiritual bodies, will it be perdition? And so of all the saints. Are not those who die in the Lord “blessed?” But if there is no <em>future state</em>, then are they perished indeed.</p>
				<p>And next (<abbr>v.</abbr> 19), if there is no Anastasis, it follows that men become disciples to Christ only with reference to the present. But on this hypothesis Paul thinks Christians are of all men most to be pitied⁠—that they would not receive an equivalent for all their self-denial and persecutions from attachment to this Master. They might prefer to be the disciples of Plato or some other teacher of virtue. But how, on the common theory, does this follow? On this theory if there is no resurrection, Christ would have gone to the spiritual world a spirit only. But he might still be a Saviour in all the vigor of a glorious Spirit. And his disciples would still have hope in him, and expect to enjoy the privileges of his administration in a future world.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 20⁠–⁠23</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Νυνὶ δὲ Χριστὸς ἐγήγερται ἐκ νεκρῶν, ἀπαρχὴ τῶν κεκοιμημένων. (21) ἐπειδὴ γὰρ δι’ ἀνθρώπου ὁ θάνατος, καὶ δι’ ἀνθρώπου ἀνάστασις νεκρῶν· (22) ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐν τῷ Ἀδὰμ πάντες ἀποθνῄσκουσιν, οὕτως καὶ ἐν τῷ Χριστῷ πάντες ζῳοποιηθήσονται. (23) ἕκαστος δὲ ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ τάγματι· ἀπαρχὴ Χριστός, ἔπειτα οἱ τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἐν τῇ παρουσίᾳ αὐτοῦ.</td>
							<td>But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. (21) For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. (22) For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. (23) But every man in his own order, Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The Apostle regards the question as settled. Christ <em>is</em> alive from the dead. And not only so, but he is the “firstfruits” of the harvest of the righteous. He represents them <em>in kind</em>. What he is, they are to be. And as he was “alive after his passion,” and in the full and unimpaired exercise of all the powers of his mind and heart, so will it be with his disciples.</p>
				<p>But “firstfruits” as applied to Christ implies more than in the original use of the word. The Patriarchs and early ancestors of the Jewish nation were called firstfruits (<abbr>Rom.</abbr> 11:16). Christ was to be the spiritual Ancestor of a great multitude which no man could number. For as by Adam death was brought into the world, so by Christ life would come to men. And as a thought worthy of consideration: the firstfruits were followed <em>immediately</em> by the incoming harvest. So that harvest of which Christ was the firstfruits began at once to come in, and from that day onward the golden sheaves have accumulated.</p>
				<p>The Apostle tells us <em>how</em> we are made alive. We <em>sin</em> through Adam seriatim, generation after generation: so we are raised to life by Christ seriatim, generation after generation; every man in his own particular order or rank (<i xml:lang="el">τάγμα</i>). This is a military term and signifies a <em>division</em> or <em>brigade</em>, and refers to men as passing into the future life in succession or seriatim. Christ the great Leader has led the way, and Christians will follow in their several orders or ranks, as Christ shall come for them severally⁠—in other words at their death. The Anastasis to the individual dates from the Parousia (“they that are Christ’s <em>at his coming</em>”), in fulfilment of the promise, “ I will come again and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also.”</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 24⁠–⁠28</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Εἶτα τὸ τέλος, ὅταν παραδῷ τὴν βασιλείαν τῷ Θεῷ καὶ πατρί, ὅταν καταργήσῃ πᾶσαν ἀρχὴν καὶ πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν καὶ δύναμιν· (25) δεῖ γὰρ αὐτὸν βασιλεύειν, ἄχριs οὗ ἂν θῇ πάντας τοὺς ἐχθροὺς ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ. (26) ἔσχατος ἐχθρὸς καταργεῖται ὁ θάνατος· (27) Πάντα γὰρ ὑπέταξεν ὑπὸ τοὺς πόδας αὐτοῦ· ὅταν δὲ εἴπῃ ὅτι πάντα ὑποτέτακται, δῆλον ὅτι ἐκτὸς τοῦ ὑποτάξαντος αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα· (28) ὅταν δὲ ὑποταγῇ αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα, τότε καὶ αὐτὸς ὁ υἱὸς ὑποταγήσεται τῷ ὑποτάξαντι αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα, ἵνα ᾖ ὁ Θεὸς πάντα ἐν πᾶσιν.</td>
							<td>Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power. (25) For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. (26) The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. (27) For he hath put all things under his feet. But when he saith, all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him. (28) And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Then the <strong>end</strong>, <i xml:lang="el">τέλος</i>, the <em>consummated state</em>. Christians will then have attained the perfected state of being, constitutionally, and also perfection of moral character. God’s government as administered over that world will be perfectly obeyed. Christ will have <em>reestablished</em> (<i xml:lang="el">παραδῷ</i>) the kingdom to God. The saints that were once rebels will be now and forever loyal to God. All opposing power and authority will be unknown, or rendered nugatory (<i xml:lang="el">καταργήσῃ</i>). Then will be fulfilled the promise to the Messiah (<abbr>Ps.</abbr> 110:1) that he should put all enemies under his feet. Even the last enemy, death, will be destroyed. The blessed inhabitants of that world will be, like their Head, “alive forevermore.” There will be no exception: “all things” will be subdued. Not, of course, that He who put all things under his feet, is to be himself subordinate. For when the “all things” promised shall be put under the Son, even then the Son as Messiah will be subordinate to God.</p>
				<p>These verses are descriptive of the heavenly state of those redeemed from among men by the grace of Christ. He will then have brought them to the promised and the consummated state of their being as redeemed sinners.</p>
				<p>The language of these verses can have but a very partial appropriateness on the common theory of the Resurrection. If the resurrection of the body were the subject of consideration, the <i xml:lang="el">τέλος</i> (end) would be spoken of as attained by this new and wonderfully improved mode of existence. But no: it is made to consist in the <em>perfect holiness</em> of that state. This alone is spoken of. The government of God is reestablished. God is perfectly obeyed. But perfect holiness on the common theory will have been attained, in respect to many, thousands of years before. True, the union of the soul with its body may be said to be the consummating fact. Then why in expanding the idea is there no allusion to that fact, instead only of the <em>perfect holiness</em> that had been realized <em>so long before</em>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verse 29</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἐπεὶ τί ποιήσουσιν οἱ βαπτιζόμενοι ὑπὲρ τῶν νεκρῶν, εἰ ὅλως νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται; τί καὶ βαπτίζονται ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν;</td>
							<td>Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Among the multitudinous interpretations given to this text, our own mind⁠—independently of the support which it gives to the theory now advocated⁠—adopts as most probable that which supposes persons converted to come and fill, in the church, the places of those who had been removed by death⁠—perhaps the death of the persecuted (<abbr>v.</abbr> 32). If there was not a future life upon which hope could fasten, why should men come forward in a day of persecution, and expose themselves to the same death which a profession of the religion of Christ had brought upon those whose places they wished to fill?</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 30⁠–⁠32</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Τί καὶ ἡμεῖς κινδυνεύομεν πᾶσαν ὥραν; (31) καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀποθνήσκω, νὴ τὴν ὑμετέραν καύχησιν, ἣν ἔχω ἐν Χριστῷ Ἰησοῦ τῷ κυρίῳ ἡμῶν. (32) εἰ κατὰ ἄνθρωπον ἐθηριομάχησα ἐν Ἐφέσῳ, τί μοι τὸ ὄφελος, εἰ νεκροὶ οὐκ ἐγείρονται; φάγωμεν καὶ πίωμεν, αὔριον γὰρ ἀποθνήσκομεν.</td>
							<td>And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? (31) I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. (32) If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we die.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The idea which we have supposed to be contained in <abbr>v.</abbr> 29 is followed out in these. The emphatic word in <abbr>v.</abbr> 30 is “we.” He brings the case right home to himself and his fellow-laborers. Why do <em>we</em> expose ourselves to such constant danger? For by the joy which I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> have in Christ Jesus, as conscious of my fidelity to him, in the midst of dangers, and which I could have only as I was thus faithful, I die day by day; I am living in a state of constant exposure to death⁠—the result of my faithful adherence to principle. And what motive eould I have to expose myself, as men do, to fight with wild beasts at Ephesus, if there is no future state? None at all. Let us rather live after the infidel creed: “Eat and drink, for tomorrow we die:” death an eternal sleep.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 33, 34</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Μὴ πλανᾶσθε· φθείρουσιν ἤθη χρηστὰ ὁμιλίαι κακαί. (34) ἐκνήψατε δικαίως καὶ μὴ ἁμαρτάνετε· ἀγνωσίαν γὰρ Θεοῦ τινὲς ἔχουσι· πρὸς ἐντροπὴν ὑμῖν λέγω.</td>
							<td>Be not deceived: Evil communications corrupt good manners. (34) Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>This shows that the Apostle is in this chapter replying to the objections of evil and designing men against whose influence he cautions the Corinthians.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verse 35</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἀλλ᾽ ἐρεῖ τις· Πῶς ἐγείρονται οἱ νεκροί; ποίῳ δὲ σώματι ἔρχονται;</td>
							<td>But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>How do the dead exist in a future state? This is the language of an objector, and proceeds on the assumption⁠—and we will grant his assumption⁠—that created spirits can exist only in a state of corporeity. We, says the objector, have their bodies, and know that they do not inhabit them, and therefore that they are not in existence. The soul must die with the body.</p>
				<p>It should be noticed that the verbs are both in the present tense. Not how <em>will</em> the dead be raised, and how <em>will</em> they come? as if the raising of the body were to be in the future. The objector understood the doctrine of the Anastasis to be, that the person dying was anastasized at once and at the time of death.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verse 36⁠–⁠38</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἄφρων, σὺ ὃ σπείρεις, οὐ ζῳοποιεῖται, ἐὰν μὴ ἀποθάνῃ· 37 καὶ ὃ σπείρεις, οὐ τὸ σῶμα τὸ γενησόμενον σπείρεις, ἀλλὰ γυμνὸν κόκκον, εἰ τύχοι, σίτου ἤ τινος τῶν λοιπῶν· 38 ὁ δὲ Θεὸς αὐτῷ δίδωσι σῶμα καθὼς ἠθέλησε, καὶ ἑκάστῳ τῶν σπερμάτων τὸ ἴδιον σῶμα.</td>
							<td>Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: (37) And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: (38) But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The Apostle does not give the objector credit for a very profound philosophy. “Thou fool!” As much as to say, all analogy leads us to the doctrine of another body that shall succeed the present. Paul does not refer to the worm and the chrysalis and the butterfly with its gorgeous wings and easy locomotion, but, as more to his purpose, refers to the processes of the vegetable kingdom. Let it be granted that the kernel of grain, deposited in the earth, remains there and goes to decay; just as the human body goes to decay and perishes: yet, <em>contemporaneously with the commencement of the decay of the kernel</em>, there springs from it another and exceedingly different structure. So with the body of man. Contemporaneously⁠—this is the necessary import of the comparison⁠—with the commencement of the decay, there springs from it a new and different structure. It is indeed a body, as really as is the present, but it does not by any means follow that it shall not be a much more glorious body⁠—as much more as heaven is more glorious than earth. This thought he illustrates in the following verses.</p>
				<p>The illustration of the grain is beautifully significant on our theory. But not so on the common theory. That would require that the kernel should go to decay and disintegration, and remain in that state long ages; and that then from this dust a vegetable germ should spring up and grow. Are we told this might be by miracle, and that the resurrection at the last day will be miraculous? Then we answer, there is no propriety in the <em>argument</em> of the Apostle. He would have simply said, God will do so-and-so by miracle. The fact that the Apostle <em>argues</em> the case, and adduces an illustration <em>from nature</em>, is evidence positive that the resurrection is a <em>natural</em> process, and one that may be illustrated by another process in nature. And if so, then this illustration <em>proves</em> that the development of the spiritual body is contemporaneous with the decay of the animal body.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 39⁠–⁠41</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Οὐ πᾶσα σὰρξ ἡ αὐτὴ σάρξ· ἀλλὰ ἄλλη μὲν ἀνθρώπων, ἄλλη δὲ σὰρξ κτηνῶν, ἄλλη δὲ ἰχθύων, ἄλλη δὲ πτηνῶν. (40) καὶ σώματα ἐπουράνια, καὶ σώματα ἐπίγεια· ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρα μὲν ἡ τῶν ἐπουρανίων δόξα, ἑτέρα δὲ ἡ τῶν ἐπιγείων. (41) ἄλλη δόξα ἡλίου, καὶ ἄλλη δόξα σελήνης, καὶ ἄλλη δόξα ἀστέρων· ἀστὴρ γὰρ ἀστέρος διαφέρει ἐν δόξῃ.</td>
							<td>All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. (40) There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. (41) There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars, for one star differeth from another star in glory.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>There are differences in the bodies of animals of earth composed of flesh, as of men, beasts, fishes, birds. Then again there are bodies of heavenly beings, as distinguished from the bodies of beings that dwell on the earth. And if we pass to the inanimate creation, we find a difference in the degrees of beauty and glory, as between the sun, moon, and stars; and the latter differ from each other in splendor.</p>
				<p>It has been supposed that by <i xml:lang="el">σώματα ἐπουράνια</i> (bodies celestial) was meant heavenly bodies in the astronomic sense. But this would be in advance of the astronomy of that day. From any authorities in our reach, neither the noun nor the adjective is used in this sense. According to Liddell and Scott, <i xml:lang="el">ἐπουράνια</i> (heavenly) is applied by Homer only to the gods, and by Pindar to the souls of the good or pious. These are the only instances given of the use of the word. So of <i xml:lang="el">σώματα</i> (bodies). The word, as by this high authority, is never used in the astronomic sense. If we turn to the use of <i xml:lang="el">ἐπουράνια</i> elsewhere in the New Testament, we shall not find a solitary instance of approach to the astronomic import. It always has the religious sense. The word occurs in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 48 and 49, and in a connection that must determine the meaning in <abbr>v.</abbr> 40. Besides, if <abbr>v.</abbr> 40 refers to the celestial bodies astronomic, <abbr>v.</abbr> 41 would be a sort of repetition. At any rate the progress which our interpretation implies, in the train of thought, would be wanting. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 39, different animate bodies of earth are compared; in <abbr>v.</abbr> 40, these are compared with the animate bodies in heaven. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 41 the comparison is between different inanimate objects, and those of the greatest splendor and glory. Yet again: if we speak of the bodies heavenly in the astronomic sense, what are the bodies earthly that furnish the contrast? The sun, moon, and stars would not be contrasted with men or animals that have bodies. With what, then, are they contrasted? The heavenly bodies may be compared with each other, even as seen by the unastronomic eye of the ancient; but not with anything on the earth.</p>
				<p>By heavenly bodies, then, the Apostle meant the bodies of angels and of the glorified of men. For, that angels have bodies, is inferred from the fact, that men in heaven are “like unto the angels.” But men in heaven are to have bodies.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 42⁠–⁠44</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Οὕτω καὶ ἡ ἀνάστασις τῶν νεκρῶν. σπείρεται ἐν φθορᾷ, ἐγείρεται ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ· (43) σπείρεται ἐν ἀτιμίᾳ, ἐγείρεται ἐν δόξῃ· σπείρεται ἐν ἀσθενείᾳ, ἐγείρεται ἐν δυνάμει· (44) σπείρεται σῶμα ψυχικόν, ἐγείρεται σῶμα πνευματικόν. ἔστι σῶμα ψυχικόν, καὶ ἔστι σῶμα πνευματικόν.</td>
							<td>So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: (48) It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power: (44) It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The above instances of the different degrees of glory that belong to different bodies as material substances, illustrate the difference between the present body and the future body. The present, that answers to the grain sown, is corruptible; the future body that answers to the vegetable growth, is incorruptible: the present is dishonored⁠—dishonored in its uses, and finally buried out of sight as offensive; the future will be glorious in all its uses, and lovely to behold in its unfading beauty: the present is weak; the future will be possessed of great power. In a word, the present is an <em>animal-life</em> (<i xml:lang="el">ψυχικόν</i>) body; the future will be a <em>mind</em> (<i xml:lang="el">πνευματικόν</i>) body. For there <em>is</em> an animal-life body, and there <em>is</em> a mind body.</p>
				<p>We are not certain that it was the design of the Spirit, in the use of the present tense, to indicate the fact⁠—if such it be⁠—that there is at present in the composition of man, a <em>twofold body</em>, answering to the <i xml:lang="el">πνεῦμα</i> (spirit) and the <i xml:lang="el">ψυχή</i> (soul) of 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:23, though certainly it harmonizes with that hypothesis. The animal-life body is (<abbr>v.</abbr> 46) the first in the order of development, and subserves the purposes of the present life. The mind body is at present in a sort of embryo state, and to be born at the death of the present body, when the corruptible shall give place to the incorruptible. The last clause of <abbr>v.</abbr> 44 has the appearance of the conclusion of a train of thought⁠—the way for which had been prepared by a series of comparisons⁠—in the simple statement of fact. As if he had said the difference between the two bodies is, in a word, simply this: the one is an animal-life body, the other is a mind body. Man consists of <i xml:lang="el">πνεῦμα</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ψυχή</i>, mind and animal life, with a body that is twofold and separable;⁠—the grosser now developed and active, the more subtle in waiting to be developed, and to subserve the purposes of the mind in its future and heavenly state. That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual (<abbr>v.</abbr> 46). That repetition and emphatic statement in <abbr>v.</abbr> 44 is significant.</p>
				<p>It may be objected that classic use does not sustain the distinction here made between <i xml:lang="el">πνεῦμα</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ψυχή</i>. That may be. Classic writers employed these terms in accordance with their philosophy of man. But what is all the philosophy of heathendom? May we know the philosophy of the Bible.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 45⁠–⁠49</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Οὕτω καὶ γέγραπται· Ἐγένετο ὁ πρῶτος ἄνθρωπος Ἀδὰμ εἰς ψυχὴν ζῶσαν· ὁ ἔσχατος Ἀδὰμ εἰς πνεῦμα ζῳοποιοῦν. (46) ἀλλ᾽ οὐ πρῶτον τὸ πνευματικὸν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ψυχικόν, ἔπειτα τὸ πνευματικόν. (47) ὁ πρῶτος ἄνθρωπος ἐκ γῆς χοϊκός, ὁ δεύτερος ἄνθρωπος, ὁ Κύριος ἐξ οὐρανοῦ. (48) οἷος ὁ χοϊκός, τοιοῦτοι καὶ οἱ χοϊκοί· καὶ οἷος ὁ ἐπουράνιος, τοιοῦτοι καὶ οἱ ἐπουράνιοι· (49) καὶ καθὼς ἐφορέσαμεν τὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ χοϊκοῦ, φορέσομεν καὶ τὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ ἐπουρανίου.</td>
							<td>And so it is written, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. (46) Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual. (47) The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven. (48) As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. (49) And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Adam was made for (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) an animal life. This he had, and this he propagated. Christ was for (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) a life-imparting spirit. The spiritual life of men as redeemed sinners with all that pertains to their future life and well being, is from Christ. He is the Anastasis and the life. The adjectives “spiritual” and “natural” in <abbr>v.</abbr> 46 are the same as in <abbr>v.</abbr> 44. The connection would seem to make them refer to the first and second Adam of <abbr>v.</abbr> 45. We think they are designed to cover both <abbr>vs.</abbr> 44, 45. Thus: The first (<i xml:lang="el">ψυχικόν</i>) Adam, and the animal-life body, and the world in which it is are first in order: the second (<i xml:lang="el">πνευματικόν</i>) Adam, and the mind body, and the spiritual and heavenly life are subsequent in order. In <abbr>vs.</abbr> 47⁠–⁠49 Adam and Christ are contrasted, and our present life compared to the former, and our future life to the latter. We are now like Adam, we shall be like Christ. When he who is the believer’s life shall appear, we shall be like him, and appear with him in glory.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 50⁠–⁠54</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Τοῦτο δέ φημι, ἀδελφοί, ὅτι σὰρξ καὶ αἷμα βασιλείαν Θεοῦ κληρονομῆσαι οὐ δύνανται, οὐδὲ ἡ φθορὰ τὴν ἀφθαρσίαν κληρονομεῖ. (51) Ἰδοὺ μυστήριον ὑμῖν λέγω· πάντες μὲν οὐ κοιμηθησόμεθα· πάντες δὲ ἀλλαγησόμεθα, (52) ἐν ἀτόμῳ, ἐν ῥιπῇ ὀφθαλμοῦ, ἐν τῇ ἐσχάτῃ σάλπιγγι· σαλπίσει γάρ, καὶ οἱ νεκροὶ ἐγερθήσονται ἄφθαρτοι, καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀλλαγησόμεθα. (53) δεῖ γὰρ τὸ φθαρτὸν τοῦτο ἐνδύσασθαι ἀφθαρσίαν καὶ τὸ θνητὸν τοῦτο ἐνδύσασθαι ἀθανασίαν. (54) Ὅταν δὲ τὸ φθαρτὸν τοῦτο ἐνδύσηται ἀφθαρσίαν, καὶ τὸ θνητὸν τοῦτο ἐνδύσηται ἀθανασίαν, τότε γενήσεται ὁ λόγος ὁ γεγραμμένος· Κατεπόθη ὁ θάνατος εἰς νῖκος.</td>
							<td>Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption inherit incorruption. (51) Behold I shew you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, (52) In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. (53) For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. (54) So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The present body is unfit for the heavenly state. The notions of past times had been crude (2 <abbr>Macc.</abbr> 7:9 <abbr>seq.</abbr>),and in many respects erroneous in relation to the mode of future existence. The time had come for explanation. Listen, then, says the Apostle, and I will reveal to you what has hitherto been unexplained (<i xml:lang="el">μυστήριον</i>). We shall not all <em>sleep</em>. This euphemism has been construed by many liierally. The Thessalonians have so understood it, as also some of you at Corinth. Death is not a sleep. But we shall all be <em>changed</em>. And this change will occur instantly at death, and we shall spring into a new life incorruptible. I repeat, we shall all be <strong>changed</strong>. When the Lord shall appear to take us to heaven, we shall experience a great change by which this corruptible and perishing organization shall give place to an indestructible and immortal body. We shall, in instant succession, be unclothed of our earthly tent, and clothed upon with our heavenly dwelling (2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:1⁠–⁠4). Then, “Death will be swallowed up in victory.”</p>
				<p>“At the last trump,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 52. The reader is referred to our explanation of 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:16 infra. When the believer dies, God is represented as coming with a heavenly host, marshalled by an archangel, who gives command to his numerous convoy through a trumpet. The idea, then, is that when God shall thus come to take the good man to heaven, the instant glorious change will occur.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">Verses 55⁠–⁠58</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ποῦ σου, θάνατε, τὸ κέντρον; ποῦ σου, ᾅδη, τὸ νῖκος; (56) Τὸ δὲ κέντρον τοῦ θανάτου, ἡ ἁμαρτία· ἡ δὲ δύναμις τῆς ἁμαρτίας ὁ νόμος· (57) τῷ δὲ Θεῷ χάρις τῷ διδόντι ἡμῖν τὸ νῖκος διὰ τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ. (58) Ὥστε, ἀδελφοί μου ἀγαπητοί, ἑδραῖοι γίνεσθε, ἀμετακίνητοι, περισσεύοντες ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ τοῦ Κυρίου πάντοτε, εἰδότες ὅτι ὁ κόπος ὑμῶν οὐκ ἔστιν κενὸς ἐν Κυρίῳ.</td>
							<td>O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? (56) The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. (57) But thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. (58) Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Can this inference of triumph be derived from the mere doctrine that the soul in some distant future is to experience a modification for the better of its condition? But as an inference from the doctrine of an immortal and blessed life, to those who had no definite belief on the subject, how legitimate! Death is indeed deprived of his sting. There is a future life to which death introduces us, and though sinners, yet in Christ, the strength and power of sin from its relations to law, are taken away. The Christian has not in this life only, hope in Christ. His hope is “full of immortality.” There is therefore the strongest conceivable motive to be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, since he now knows that his labor is not in vain in the Lord. It shall be the seed of a rich and an immortal harvest.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th colspan="2">1 Thessalonians 4:13⁠–⁠18</th>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Οὐ θέλομεν δὲ ὑμᾶς ἀγνοεῖν, ἀδελφοί, περὶ τῶν κεκοιμημένων, ἵνα μὴ λυπῆσθε, καθὼς καὶ οἱ λοιποὶ οἱ μὴ ἔχοντες ἐλπίδα. (14) εἰ γὰρ πιστεύομεν ὅτι Ἰησοῦς ἀπέθανεν καὶ ἀνέστη, οὕτω καὶ ὁ Θεὸς τοὺς κοιμηθέντας διὰ τοῦ Ἰησοῦ ἄξει σὺν αὐτῷ. (15) τοῦτο γὰρ ὑμῖν λέγομεν ἐν λόγῳ Κυρίου, ὅτι ἡμεῖς οἱ ζῶντες οἱ περιλειπόμενοι εἰς τὴν παρουσίαν τοῦ Κυρίου οὐ μὴ φθάσωμεν τοὺς κοιμηθέντας· (16) ὅτι αὐτὸς ὁ Κύριος ἐν κελεύσματι, ἐν φωνῇ ἀρχαγγέλου καὶ ἐν σάλπιγγι Θεοῦ καταβήσεται ἀπ᾽ οὐρανοῦ, καὶ οἱ νεκροὶ ἐν Χριστῷ ἀναστήσονται πρῶτον, (17) ἔπειτα ἡμεῖς οἱ ζῶντες οἱ περιλειπόμενοι ἅμα σὺν αὐτοῖς ἁρπαγησόμεθα ἐν νεφέλαις εἰς ἀπάντησιν τοῦ Κυρίου εἰς ἀέρα καὶ οὕτω πάντοτε σὺν Κυρίῳ ἐσόμεθα. (18) ὥστε παρακαλεῖτε ἀλλήλους ἐν τοῖς λόγοις τούτοις.</td>
							<td>But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. (14) For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. (15) For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep. (16) For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: (17) Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. (18) Wherefore comfort one another with these words.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>This is from the pen of one accustomed to the style of the Old Testament. It partakes largely of the Hebrew idiom. It is the language of bold imagery.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> It would seem that the Apostle had used the same or similar language when at Thessalonica. But, addressed to Greeks, it was understood literally⁠—just as modern Occidentals have understood it⁠—all save that they did not, as do the moderns, locate the facts in the distant future. They were waiting for them as soon to occur. They were interested in them, and esteemed it a privilege and an honor to be spectators and participators. It would seem that they were looking to the Parousia as a scene of earth, and to belong to the present life. Hence when some of their friends died, they mourned for them as lost to this “kingdom and glory.”</p>
				<p>To correct this error, and to furnish the material with which they may “comfort one another,” is the object of what is said in these verses.</p>
				<p>The Apostle still uses the same language of imagery, and is again misunderstood, as appears from the second epistle. Nor has the misunderstanding been confined to his day.</p>
				<p>Let us attend carefully to the train of thought. Verse 13 represents the Thessalonians as mourning for their friends who had died, as having no hope of them. And from verse 14 it would seem that they doubted of their future existence. They were also looking for the glorious kingdom of Christ, but, as we have said, thought it a thing of time and earth, so that to the dead all of it was lost. Paul corrects both these errors.</p>
				<p>Verse 14. If we believe that Jesus died and was anastasized, so also those who have died a Christian death will God bring with him. This asserts and proves the future life of Christians. They will die and be anastasized as was Christ.</p>
				<p>“Bring with him.” The figure in relation to the Parousia is that of unveiling, manifesting, coming, especially the latter. When, then, Christ “comes” to believers, he will “bring with him” those who have died. As he comes, they will come. When he is present, they will be present. That is, they are in the heavenly state as he is. He has changed their vile body, so that it is fashioned like to his glorious body. And when the living, who are in waiting for the Parousia, shall experience the change by which they will be able to recognize as present the Saviour, they will be able to recognize as present their Christian friends who have died. But further, and with reference to the Coming and Kingdom of Christ,</p>
				<p>Verse 15. This we say unto you by divine authority, that we, who are alive and left yet to meet the Coming of the Lord, shall have no advantage over those that have died. Here the living are represented as left unto, or as yet to meet the Coming of the Lord, and thus distinguished from the dead who have experienced this meeting (<i xml:lang="el">ἀπάντησιν</i>, <abbr>v.</abbr> 17).</p>
				<p>“Shall have no advantage over” <i xml:lang="el">οὐ μὴ φθάσωμεν</i>. Hermann on the use of the subjunctive aorist, or the indicative future with <i xml:lang="el">οὐ μή</i>, proposes the following canon: “<i xml:lang="la">Conjunctivo <abbr>aor.</abbr> locus est aut in eo, quod jam actum est, aut in re incerti temporis sed semel vel brevi temporis momento agenda; futuri vero usus, quem ipsa verbi forma nonnisi in rebus <abbr>futur.</abbr> versari ostendit, ad ea pertinet, quae aut diuturniora aliquando eventura indicare volumnus aut non aliquo quocunque sed remotiore aliquo tempore dicimus futura esse.</i>”</p>
				<p>Winer thinks this canon cannot have universal application to the New Testament, and refers to our text as an exception. The reader will see that our theory makes the canon and the text agree. The reference of <i xml:lang="el">φθάσωμεν</i> is “<i xml:lang="la">in re incerti temporis sed semel vel brevi temporis momento agenda</i>.” It follows, then, that this canon gives all the authority of a general principle to our support. —Winer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Idioms</i>, § 60. 3.</p>
				<p>Verse 16. For the Lord himself with a shout, with the voice of an archangel, and with the trump of God, will descend from heaven: and the dead in Christ will be previously anastasized.</p>
				<p>“The Lord himself.” Jesus, in whom the believer has so much confidence and hope, will come down and be personally present and the Actor in this great transaction. This is said as encouragement to the fearful.</p>
				<p>“With a shout,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> These are terms derived from the vocabulary of war, and imply the methods by which hosts are led or incited. “The Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Jude 14. “Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him” (<abbr>v.</abbr> 14 above). The representation is that of the heavenly hosts coming to meet the saint in the Parousia. They are led on by an archangel. The “shout” (<i xml:lang="el">κέλευσμα</i>, “the word of command in war,” “cry of incitement, of urging on”) is “the voice of an archangel;” and this word of command and incitement is given, as was the custom when the host was large, with a trumpet. It is called “the trump of God” to imply that it “sounds by command of God.” ⁠—Rob. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Lex.</abbr></i> <i xml:lang="el">Θεός, <abbr>α. β.</abbr></i></p>
				<p>“Previously anastasized,” <i xml:lang="el">ἀναστήσονται</i>, future middle; will raise themselves or rise: that is, will be previously living the future life⁠—be in the exercise of the functions of that life. When Christ comes to us the living, who are in waiting (<i xml:lang="el">περιλειπόμενοι</i>), the dead will be already in his presence⁠—will come with him (<abbr>v.</abbr> 14).</p>
				<p>Verse 17. Then we the living that are left, shall be caught up in clouds to meet the Lord in the air together with them. And thus we shall all be with the Lord.</p>
				<p>“<i xml:lang="el">Ἅμα σὺν αὐτοῖς</i> (with them) does not modify <i xml:lang="el">ἁρπαγησόμεθα</i> (shall be caught up) merely, but the entire sentence. See <abbr>chap.</abbr> 5:10. The dead have been already caught up or anastasized (<abbr>v.</abbr> 16). This is implied in <i xml:lang="el">οἱ ζῶντες οἱ περιλειπόμενοι</i>⁠—the living who <em>are yet left over unto</em> the Parousia (<abbr>v.</abbr> 15), as distinguished from the dead.</p>
				<p>“We shall all,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Some manuscripts have <i xml:lang="el">πάντες</i> for <i xml:lang="el">πάντοτε</i>. The connection would seem very greatly to favor this reading.</p>
				<p>“In clouds.” The reference is to clouds as surrounding those that ascend, and not to a multitude as rising like a cloud. For <i xml:lang="el">ἐν νεφέλαις</i>, see Mark 13:26. The idea conveyed would be that of locomotion rapid and without effort.</p>
				<p>The use of <i xml:lang="el">ἡμεῖς οἱ ζῶντες</i>, we the living, is decisive in applying the language in connection to the Thessalonian Christians and to Paul himself⁠—to the persons then living. To say “we” means “such of our race as shall be living many thousand years hence” is to abjure the most certain and obvious laws of language. Besides, the “we” in such case would be but an infinitesimal portion of the race, and to which neither the Thessalonians nor Paul, nor generations countless that should succeed, would belong. “We,” then, on the common hypothesis should by all means include Paul and those addressed and all the multitude immense that would be in heaven at “the end of the world.” And Paul should have said, “<em>They</em> the living that remain.”</p>
				<p>The language of the following chapter is decisive in applying that of these verses to the persons then living. The Thessalonians knew perfectly that the day of the Lord, by which is meant the Parousia of <abbr>v.</abbr> 15, might come at any time. The wicked would not heed the facts that made this certain to Christians, and would cry peace and safety, but sudden destruction would come upon them. They would meet the destroyer, and sink into the grave and into perdition. But they, as Christians, were not in the darkness of an impenitent heart. They were the children of light. They must not, then, permit “<em>that day</em>”⁠—the allusion was understood⁠—to find them unprepared. If this does not make death and the day of the Lord⁠—the great matter considered in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 13⁠–⁠18 of the previous chapter⁠—synchronical, we know not how it could be shown to be so by any use of language.</p>
				<p>Let us view in connection what we have found to be the meaning of the Apostle in these words, that have, as we think, been so greatly misunderstood by commentators. The Thessalonians need not mourn⁠—for such of their Christian friends as had died, as if they were lost to the glorious kingdom of Christ. They were not “asleep,” but “changed” (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:52). For the same reason that we could believe that Christ was still alive after death, might we believe them still alive: so that when Christ should come, they would come with him. In other words, when they themselves should be the subjects of a change that would enable them to see Christ, they would also be able to see their deceased friends. They would find them possessed of a full and vigorous being in the heavenly world. So that the living who were yet in waiting for the Parousia, would have no advantage over those who had died in the Lord. For Jesus is soon to come to us, and bring with him the heavenly hosts; and the dead in Christ will be previously of that host. Then we, the living, dropping the burden of our clay, and now of easy locomotion, shall be caught up, borne on clouds into their midst: that is, by death be so changed as to recognize their presence, and participate in their experience. And so we all shall be with Jesus our Lord.</p>
				<p>The Apostle then does not in 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:13⁠–⁠18 teach a catastrophe or “end of the world,” and a general resurrection of the body in connection with it. On the other hand, he here as elsewhere teaches that the Parousia and the Anastasis are just at hand, and are coming as a thief in the night⁠—to the sinner a day of destruction, to the saint a day of glory.</p>
				<p>As confirmatory of this our interpretation, see in a previous Chapter the view expressed of 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:1⁠–⁠3, which evidently refers to these verses in the first epistle.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
