<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II: The Coming of the Lord</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Coming of the Lord</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“The Coming of the Lord,” as has been said in the preceding chapter, is by no means to be confounded with “The Coming of the Son of Man.” The latter we have attempted to define and explain. The former now claims attention.</p>
			<p>No writer, so far as we have been able to discover, has made this distinction. The two forms of expression have been regarded as equivalent, and both alike as referring to “the end of the world”⁠—by which has been understood the termination of the human race on the earth, and a general catastrophe of the globe. A dissent from the unanimous exegetical and theological past and present, is certainly to be made with diffidence and humility. And the writer has been ready often to say of himself that he must be wrong because alone. But he can find nowhere else a foundation on which to stand with the great principles of language and of logic his support. “Let God be true.” <i xml:lang="la">Magna est veritas, et praevalebit.</i></p>
			<p>To us this distinction seems not only to lie on the face of the Gospels and the Epistles, but, when once admitted, to possess a magic power that removes the innumerable and insurmountable obstacles, that have been in the way of the satisfactory explanation of the language of the Scriptures on this subject. Every reader of commentary or theology knows what forced constructions have been resorted to, and with what unsatisfactory results. The general subject has been regarded as emphatically the region of mist and clouds. Positiveness has had no place here. All has been conjectural and doubtful. And the mist and obscurity that has been so abundant here, has spread itself over everything that lies contiguous. As one of the most recent and thoroughly elaborated works illustrating these remarks, we refer the reader to Stier’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Words of the Lord Jesus</i>. See especially his commentary on Matthew 24 and 25, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 244 <abbr class="eoc">seq.</abbr> And commentators in general, so far as we have had opportunity to observe, employ such language as⁠—“<em>Probably</em> the writer meant,”⁠—“<em>Perhaps</em> he may refer,”⁠—“<em>If</em> this be his meaning,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> They never speak with the confidence which clear and well-defined views inspire.</p>
			<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Apostles “In Error”</h3>
				<p>More than this. It is a conviction very common that <strong>the Apostles were in error</strong>. The more frank and outspoken admit this in so many words: while others less openhearted say the same thing, though indirectly and with more or less of ambiguity. As belonging to these classes are such illustrious names as Locke, Watts, Jonathan Edwards, Barnes, Conybeare, Olshausen, Arnold, Bush, Hudson.</p>
				<p>We think this a matter of such importance as to justify a somewhat extended reference.</p>
				<p>The following is from “An Essay towards a Proof of a Separate State of Souls between Death and the Resurrection,” by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Isaac Watts, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:name-title">D. D.</abbr></p>
				<p>“I might yet take occasion from this objection to give a further reason, why the Apostles more frequently draw their motives of hope and fear from the Resurrection and the Great Judgment; that is, that even <em>that day of recompense was generally then supposed to be near at hand</em>, and so there was less need to insist upon the joys and sorrows of the separate state.</p>
				<p>“.⁠ ⁠… <em>The Christians of the first age did generally expect the second coming of Christ to judgment, and the resurrection of the dead, in that very age wherein it was foretold.</em> <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul gives us a hint of it in 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:1, 2. They supposed that the day of the Lord was just appearing. And many expressions of Christ concerning his return, or coming again after his departure, seem to represent his absence as a thing of no long continuance. It is true these words of his may partly refer to his coming to destroy Jerusalem, and the coming in of his kingdom among the Gentiles; or his coming by his messenger of death; yet they generally, in their supreme and final sense, point to his coming to raise the dead, and judge the world. And from the words of Christ, also, concerning John, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 21:22, ‘If I will that he tarry till I come,’ it is probable that the Apostles themselves at first, as well as other Christians, might derive this apprehension of his speedy coming.</p>
				<p>“It is certain, that when Christ speaks of his coming in general and promiscuous and parabolical terms, whether with regard to the destruction of Jerusalem or the judgment of the world, he saith, <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:34, ‘Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled.’ And the Apostles frequently told the world, the coming of the Lord was near; <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 4:5.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“.⁠ ⁠… <em>These expressions had plainly such an influence on the primitive Christians, as that they imagined the day of resurrection and judgment was very near</em>: and since the prophetical words of Christ and his Apostles <em>seemed to carry this appearance in them and to keep the church under some uncertainty, it is no wonder that the Apostles chiefly referred the disciples of that age to the day of their resurrection for comfort under their sufferings and sorrows</em>. And though they never asserted that Christ would come to raise the dead and judge the world in that age, yet <em>when they knew themselves that he would not come so soon, they might not think it necessary to give every Christian or every church an immediate account of the more distant time of this great event, that the uncertainty of it might keep them ever watchful</em>. And even when <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul informs the Thessalonians that the day of the Lord was not so very near as they imagined it, 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:2, yet he does not put it off beyond that century by any express language.</p>
				<p>“Thus we see there is very good reason why the New Testament should derive its motives of terror and comfort chiefly from the Resurrection and the Day of Judgment.” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79⁠–⁠83.</p>
				<p>From this it appears that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Watts did not suppose the Apostles themselves, at the time of writing, to have been in error as to the time of the coming of the Lord; but that their disciples and the early Christians misunderstood their language, and supposed that event very near; and that <em>the Apostles permitted them to remain in this error from design</em>, that they might find encouragement and support in their trials, from the belief⁠—<em>what was not true</em>⁠—that the glories of the kingdom of Christ were very near. This is worse than to suppose the Apostles in error. It is to convert them into Jesuits, and to make them the perpetrators of “pious fraud!”</p>
				<p>What else but to impute this motive⁠—with reverence be it spoken⁠—to Jesus Christ himself, is the import of the following language of the celebrated commentator now being brought to the notice of our country?</p>
				<p>“The mode of expression here (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 34 and 36) adopted is the only one that can be conceived of, as suited to the circumstances of the case. For had the Redeemer intended to say that his coming was yet very distant, <em>such a statement would have entirely destroyed the ethical import of the prophecy, namely, the incitement to watchfulness which it was designed to produce</em>; and if, on the other hand, he had so expressed himself as to say nothing at all about the time when these things would come to pass, this total silence would have been no less paralyzing in its influence. But the representation given by the Lord was so framed as to act in a twofold way: first, to keep before the mind <em>the constant possibility of his coming</em>, and, secondly, to show the impossibility of fixing upon a precise period; the former object was accomplished by verse 34, the latter by verse 36.” ⁠—Olshausen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Commentary on Matthew</i>, 24:36.</p>
				<p>“Such a statement”⁠—a statement of the simple truth⁠—“would have entirely destroyed the <em>ethical import</em> of the prophecy, namely, the incitement to watchfulness which it <em>was designed to produce</em>!!” The Redeemer then “designed” to produce a state of mind which could not be produced by the truth⁠—which truth “would have entirely destroyed.” Even “silence would have been no less paralyzing in its influence.” His disciples must live under a belief, erroneous, of “the constant possibility of his coming.”</p>
				<p>But what is to become of us of this day, whose is the misfortune to know that a long period, even a “millennium” is yet before the world and the church? “The ethical import” aforesaid is to us “entirely destroyed.” We are so unfortunate as to be dispossessed of the salutary error that “the end of the world” is or may be near. There is to us no “constant possibility” of it.</p>
				<p>Is there not “a more excellent way” of interpreting the language of the Saviour in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24, and can we not attribute to him motives that shall in higher degree redound to his glory and elevate him in the hearts of the children of men?</p>
				<p>The following from Conybeare is characteristic of the man. He frankly says in plain words what he thinks.</p>
				<p>“It will be remembered that a subject on which he had especially dwelt while he was at Thessalonica, and to which he [Paul] had also alluded in his first Epistle, was the second advent of our Lord. We know that our Saviour himself had warned his disciples that ‘of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but the Father only;’ and we find these words remarkably fulfilled by the fact that the early church, and <em>even the Apostles themselves, expected their Lord to come again in that very generation. <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul himself shared in that expectation</em>, but being under the guidance of the Spirit of Truth, he did not deduce any erroneous conclusions from this mistaken premise. Some of his disciples, on the other hand, inferred that if indeed the present world were so soon to come to an end, it was useless to pursue their common earthly employments any longer. They forsook their work, and gave themselves up to dreamy expectations of the future; so that the whole framework of society in the Thessalonian church was in danger of dissolution.” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life and Epistles of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 401.</p>
				<p>If Paul did not “deduce any erroneous conclusions,” he made an erroneous statement on a most important question of fact; and others might draw, as a legitimate “conclusion,” erroneous practical inferences, as “some of his disciples” did. We know nothing of the errors of Paul, except as we learn them from his writings. If these are erroneous, what becomes of the doctrine of the inspiration of the Epistles?</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Thomas Arnold of Rugby, whose theological writings are now attracting attention, says directly that Paul “<em>expected that the world would come to an end in the generation then existing</em>.” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sermons on the Christian Life, Course, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 400.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Albert Barnes in his “Commentary” on 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, says, “I do not know that the proper doctrine of inspiration suffers, if we admit that the Apostles were ignorant of the exact time when the world would close; or even that in regard to the precise period when that would take place, <em>they might be in error</em>.”</p>
				<p>Now the statement in the abstract that inspired writers were not omniscient, or that on some points, where their inspiration did not extend, they might be in error, is very harmless. No doubt the sacred writers were as ignorant as other men, what would be the weather on the morrow; no doubt they often had opinions on this subject that the morrow proved to have been erroneous. But the above remarks are made in reply to the objection, “that Paul expected to live until the Lord Jesus should return; that he therefore expected that the world would soon end, and that in this he was mistaken and could not be inspired.” The “error” referred to, therefore, is on this point; and it is “error” found in his writings on this subject, and is the reason why he says “We” and not “They,”⁠—“error” in the Bible. And it is the error of Paul and others of the Apostles expressed in the Bible on the subject of <em>the end of the world and the judgment as near</em>, to which the language “they might be in error” refers. This is an admission of fearful import in its bearings upon our confidence in the Book of⁠—shall I say <em>inspiration</em>? What part of it is inspired, and what not? If the Apostles might be in error on this point, they might be on any and every other. And “<strong>The Book</strong>” becomes <em>a</em> book.</p>
				<p>President Edwards has the following: “Considering the scope of the Apostle in these verses (1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:15⁠–⁠17), all that can be inferred from such a manner of speaking, is, that it might, for aught was then revealed, be while they lived. For the scope of the Apostle was to comfort the Thessalonians concerning their friends that were already dead, with the consideration, that they should surely meet them again, at the day of the Lord’s coming. And therefore, it was most proper and natural for the Apostle to speak of them in the third person. And it is but just to suppose, that it was only the uncertainty of the time, that was the ground of the Apostle’s using such a manner of expression; because he, in this very context, speaks of the time as altogether uncertain.” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 221, 222.</p>
				<p>President Edwards does not here attribute positive error to the Apostle; but considers him <em>ignorant</em>. Paul supposed the day of the Lord <em>might</em> come during the then present generation. And he adjusts his language to this hypothesis. His object was to comfort the Thessalonians who were then living, in respect to their friends who had died. They would meet them in the day of judgment, and it <em>might come</em> “while they lived.” Had the Apostle known the truth, he would not, of course, have administered the comfort to be found in the supposition that it <em>might</em> come soon. Here, then, was comfort from an erroneous hypothesis, which the truth would have destroyed. Here, then, is “error”⁠—the error that the day of judgment <em>might come</em> during the lifetime of that generation. Our venerable author expresses himself with hesitation and reserve; yet does in fact admit it.</p>
				<p>But the language of the Apostle implies more than the possibility that the day would then come. Why does he not say, “Then <em>they</em> who are alive, will not prevent ws who are asleep?” That the order of the pronouns is inverted implies that the Apostle <em>expected</em> that the day would come when “<strong>we</strong>”⁠—the people then alive⁠—were in the world. He, in fact, <em>does say this</em>⁠—not as an expectation or possibility, but as a fact, uttered by inspiration.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke’s opinion may be learned from the following extract from Barnes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes</i>, 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:2. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Locke has given an interpretation of this in which he is probably alone, but which has so much appearance of plausibility that it is not improper to refer to it. He supposes that this whole passage has reference to the fact that at the coming of the Redeemer the body will be changed without experiencing death (<abbr>comp.</abbr> 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, 52); that <em>Paul expected that this might soon occur</em>; and that he earnestly desired to undergo this transformation without experiencing the pains of dying. He therefore paraphrases it, ‘For in this tabernacle I groan, earnestly desiring, without putting off this mortal, earthly body by death, to have that celestial body superinduced, if so be the coming of Christ shall overtake me in this life, before I put off this body.’ ”</p>
				<p>The following is from Barnes on 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 1:7. “<em>Waiting for.</em> <em>Expecting</em>, or <em>looking for</em> this coming with glad and anxious desire. This was, certainly, one of the endowments to which he referred, to wit, that they had grace given them earnestly to desire, and to wait for the second appearing of the Lord Jesus.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“<em>The coming</em>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <abbr>Gr.</abbr> The revelation⁠—(<i xml:lang="el">τὴν ἀποκάλυψιν</i>)⁠—the manifestation of the Son of God. That is, waiting for his return to judge the world, and for his approbation of his people in that day. <em>The earnest expectation of the Lord Jesus became one of the marks of early Christian piety.</em> This return was promised by the Saviour to his anxious disciples, when he was about to leave them. John 14:3. The promise was renewed when he ascended to heaven. Acts 1:11. It became the <em>settled hope and expectation</em> of Christians that he would return. <abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:13. 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 3:12. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 9:28. And with the earnest prayer that he would quickly come, John closes the volume of inspiration. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:20, 21.”</p>
				<p>To us nothing can seem more absurd than for a Christian to be expecting and looking for with glad and anxious desire⁠—to have the settled hope and expectation, and to pray for the speedy occurrence of an event which it is known cannot happen till thousands of years afterward. He may believe in such an occurrence, but he is not <em>waiting for it</em>. And when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes represents it as the settled hope and expectation of Christians that Christ was soon to “return to judge the world,” and quotes <abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:13. 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 3:12, and <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 9:28, showing that he includes the Apostles⁠—indeed he refers by name to John⁠—is it not a necessary implication that the Apostles were in error⁠—that they acted out, and recorded as a part of the Bible, that error?</p>
				<p>On Titus 2:13, “Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,” Barnes has the following: “<em>Looking for.</em> Expecting; waiting for. That is, in the faithful performance of our duties to ourselves, to our fellow-creatures, and to God, we are patiently to wait for the coming of our Lord. (1.) We are to believe that he will return; (2.) we are to be in a posture of expectation, not knowing <em>when</em> he will come; and (3.) we are to be ready for him whenever he shall come. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes</i> on <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:42⁠–⁠44. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:4. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:20.</p>
				<p>“<em>That blessed hope.</em> The fulfilment of that hope so full of blessedness to us.</p>
				<p>“<em>The glorious appearing.</em> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes</i>, 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:8. <abbr>Comp.</abbr> 1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 6:14. 2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 1:10; 4:1, 8.</p>
				<p>“<em>Of the great God.</em> There can be little doubt, if any, that by ‘the great God’ here, the Apostle referred to the Lord Jesus, for it is not a doctrine of the New Testament that God himself <em>as such</em>, or in contradistinction from his incarnate Son, will appear at the last day.”</p>
				<p>Here again we are to be waiting and in the posture of expectation, not knowing <em>when</em> he will come. Did not Paul know that the career of Christianity was not to be complete in that generation? If he did not, <em>we</em> know that a long course of years is yet to be run. There is to be a “millennium.” And this entire class of texts can have no application <em>to us</em>. We are not and cannot be said to be waiting for the “end of the world.” And if the early Christians were, it was because they were “in error.”</p>
				<p>Hudson, a very rigid exegete, is embarrassed in his attempts to harmonize the common theory of the Resurrection and the language of the Bible. His straightforwardness compels him to speak as follows:</p>
				<p>“ ‘Ye shall be rewarded at the resurrection of the just,’ is the promise of our Saviour. And on this event Paul, with the Gospel of ‘Jesus and the Resurrection,’ seems to have fixed his hopes (<abbr>Rom.</abbr> 8:23. 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 6:14; 15:12⁠–⁠55. 2 Cor.4:14; 5:2⁠–⁠4. <abbr>Eph.</abbr> 2:6. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:10⁠–⁠13, 20, 21. <abbr>Col.</abbr> 2:12, 13. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:14⁠–⁠18; 5:23. 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:7. 2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 4:8). When the event would occur no one knew; but <em>it was expected soon</em> (1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 6:14. 2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 4:8. <abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:13. <abbr>Jas.</abbr> 5:7, 8. 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 1:16).” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctrine of a Future Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 255.</p>
				<p>By whom was it “expected soon?” By the Apostles, of course, as will be seen by the references, which are to the language of the Apostles as expressing their own views.</p>
				<p>We select the following from Olshausen: 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:15. “ <i xml:lang="el">‘Ἡμεῖς οἱ ζῶντες</i>, we who <em>hope</em> to continue to live until the advent of Christ. It is unmistakably clear from this that Paul deemed it possible that he and his contemporaries might live to see the coming again of Christ.⁠ ⁠… . That it has continued unfulfilled, this hope of Paul’s, is no doubt true.⁠ ⁠… All the writers of the New Testament considered Christ’s advent as near (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, 52. 1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 4:7. 1 John 2:18. James 5:8), in fact the whole doctrine would not have the slightest significance, unless the longing after the second coming of Christ were each moment alive, and therefore continually deemed possible.</p>
				<p>“It was only towards the end of his life (<abbr>Phil.</abbr> 1:23) that Christ’s advent retreated, in Paul’s mind, to a remoter distance.” “The Apostle towards the end of his life, no longer considers the coming of Christ as so near at hand, that he hoped to live yet to see it.”</p>
				<p>It seems then that all the writers of the New Testament considered Christ’s advent as near, and supposed they and their contemporaries might live to see it. Indeed the whole doctrine would not have had the slightest significance or “ethical import,” had the truth in relation to it been known. The “longing after” it must proceed on the hypothesis that it may come at any time, or it would have no salutary moral bearing. But that “longing” could live only on error! “Sanctify them through”⁠—error! “Thy word is”⁠—error!</p>
				<p>We introduce the following statement from Professor Stuart: “Tholuck, and most of the late commentators in Germany, suppose that the apostle expected the speedy advent of Christ upon earth a second time, when the day of glory to the church would commence. Accordingly, they represent him, here and elsewhere, as exhorting Christians to be on the alert, constantly expecting the approach of such a day. In support of this view, Tholuck appeals to <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 4:5. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:2,6. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:12. Such views, and such a mode of representation, seem at present to be widely diffused in Germany.” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Commentary on Romans</i> 13:11.</p>
				<p>These extracts are from men of eminent talent. And for the very reason that they are such, they thus speak. It is the only inference that a rigid logic can draw from their premises. And they who are the most unequivocal and explicit, evince the most candor, and the control in highest degree, of the true principles of interpretation. There is no escape from this conclusion, if the premises are conceded. These premises are that “the Coming of the Son of Man,” and “the Coming of the Lord” are the same; and that with these “the end of the world,” “the Judgment,” and “the Resurrection,” are associate events; and that by the end of the world (<i xml:lang="el">αἰών</i>) is meant the physical catastrophe. This conceded, and <em>it must be</em> that the Apostles expected the great event in their day. If this be not so, then we know nothing of the opinions of the Apostles and of the Saviour by what he or they have said. We admire the courage of such men as have given a frank utterance to a meaning, which the application of their own principles must of necessity find in the language of the Bible. The caution and reserve with which some writers utter this same belief, show that they were not satisfied with their own findings, nor with the principles by which they were led, or rather driven to them. We wonder that they did not throw away at once, both their conclusions and their premises, and enter upon an <em>original</em> investigation of the Sacred Volume.</p>
				<p>We have made these quotations at such length and in such numbers, that our readers may see distinctly what is the necessary implication of the common theory of the Coming of the Lord. The greatest and the best of men are driven upon the painful conclusion that the Apostles were in error⁠—a conclusion that takes along with it, of necessity, the doctrine of the inspiration of the Bible⁠—save in a sense qualified, vague, and, to the good man who for his eternal interests would find a basis of stability, most unsatisfactory.</p>
				<p>We have hoped by these extracts to produce in our readers a degree of doubt in relation to the common methods of interpreting the Scriptures on this subject, that shall prepare them for an impartial examination of a different theory. Opinions sustained by the voice of antiquity and the names of the great and good, stand by authority. They are assumed to be correct almost of course. While of opinions that conflict with them, the presumption is that they must be wrong. It ought to be so. It is so by a law of our nature. That it is so, is a ground of hope for the truth and its triumphs. Yet this, like many things else that are good, may be in excess. “To err is human.” Nought but the Bible is to be assumed as <em>certainly right</em>. And when we see opinions connected to such logical sequences, as we find in these quotations; and which we ourselves can see are legitimate and necessary, we should pause and listen, with candor and a heart ready for conviction, to any attempt to find a more excellent way. Let us remember the words of the pastor of the Pilgrims when he bade them farewell, “I am verily persuaded, I am very confident <em>the Lord has more truth yet to break forth out of his holy word</em>;”⁠—the words of Vinet, “Even now, after eighteen centuries of Christianity, we may be involved in some enormous error, of which the Christianity of the future will make us ashamed;”⁠—those of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Woods, “All our endeavors to arrive at a more perfect knowledge of the Scriptures imply, that hitherto <em>they have been understood but imperfectly</em>;”⁠—of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart, “The time is coming when <em>all the dark places</em> of the Bible will be elucidated.”</p>
				<p>Our theory of what is implied in “The coming of the Son of Man,” has carried us through the gospels, without, as we think our readers will say, the slightest difficulty. All has seemed plain and obvious and relevant. We will hope to find the same facile exegesis of what in the subsequent portions of the New Testament is said of the “Coming of the Lord.” And we think we shall find, that in making these two forms of expression refer to different and quite dissimilar events, we are not making a distinction without a difference. We would ourselves as soon attempt a commentary on the New Testament on the hypothesis that “the law of Moses” and “the gospel of Christ” were equivalent and interchangeable phrases. And we think we could accomplish our task with as little occasion for ingenuity in inventing theories, and with as little strain upon the laws of language or of logic. And we think also that we should be driven by a no more inexorable necessity upon the conclusion that the Apostles were in error.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Destruction of Jerusalem and Overthrow of the Jews</h3>
				<p>It may in this connection be proper, as introductory to the general subject of the chapter, to refer to the fact that by the Coming of the Lord⁠—in some instances, certainly of the use of this language in the Epistles⁠—is understood by some, the destruction of Jerusalem in the providence of God. This interpretation is especially given of James 5:7, 8, where the Coming is to be waited for with patience and is said to be near. It is supposed that by the overthrow and the dispersion of the Jews they would have less power to act as persecutors; and also that the fact would be followed by the more rapid extension of the Christian religion. But it should be remembered that the Apostle is addressing the Jews that were “scattered abroad” in different countries; and that the persecutions which they are exhorted to bear patiently, were persecutions which the more wealthy of their own people, who were with them in foreign countries, inflicted upon their poorer brethren.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> How would these Jews, “Parthians, Medes, Elamites, dwellers in Mesopotamia,⁠ ⁠… in parts of Libya about Cyrene and strangers of Rome,” be so much affected by what should happen at Jerusalem? Jews, they would be Jews still, and true to their instincts as such, they would many of them be rich, and being rich, oppress their poor brethren. That the destruction of Jerusalem, then, should be spoken of in language so general and applicable to all, as <em>the</em> great fact that should put an end to their trials, and bring them into the realization of all their largest hopes, is utterly incredible.</p>
				<p>Besides, the use of this phraseology is not confined to James when addressing Jews. Paul uses it when writing to Gentile churches. And even here, too, the same explanation is attempted. But what was the destruction of Jerusalem to the Thessalonians or the Corinthians? The Christian Dispensation, so far as they were concerned, was completely introduced. Christ was glorified⁠—exalted Head over all things to the church, and dispensing his Spirit and all the gifts of his gracious system. Whatever, therefore, might befall the distant, and, politically considered, very unimportant province of the Roman Empire, was of little moment to them. This, then, is an utterly forced construction, and resorted to only from necessity.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">“Coming of the Lord”</h3>
				<p>It will, we suppose, be conceded by all, that whatever is meant by “The Coming of the Lord”⁠—<i xml:lang="el">παρουσία τοῦ κυρίου</i>, literally <em>the being present</em> of the⁠—Lord⁠—the same is implied in such phrases as “The appearing of Jesus Christ” (1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 6:14); “The revelation of Jesus Christ” (1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 1:13); “The day of the Lord Jesus” (<abbr>Phil.</abbr> 1:6); “The great day” (Jude 6); “The last day” (John 12:48); “That day” (2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 1:12); “The day” (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 3:13); also that with it the Resurrection and the Judgment are synchronical or associate.</p>
				<p>What is the great fact or group of facts referred to by the phrase, The Coming of the Lord? It has its definite, primary import, also is used to suggest some incident or incidents of the primary fact.</p>
				<p>These facts in general are those of importance that are connected with the death of the body. And this phrase presents these facts as viewed from the standpoint of faith, and not as they appear from the standpoint of earth and sense. It represents the <em>important</em> elements that enter into the case; while those which are almost exclusively regarded by those without faith, and made too prominent by these of feeble faith, are not included.</p>
				<p>When the present mode of existence ends, another succeeds, in which, in a method not known to us now, we shall have a power of perceiving spiritual beings, and especially of recognizing Christ, that will be as impressive, as influential upon our practical convictions, as is now the sense of sight. The Saviour will <em>appear</em>. So of the angels and the spirits of just men made perfect. So of all the realities of the spiritual world. Then, too, will terminate the educational and probationary processes of this life, and an order of consequences commence from that time. To the saints it will be heaven. Hence it is said to be the “revelation” of salvation (1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 1:5), the “day of redemption” (<abbr>Eph.</abbr> 4:30), <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> To the wicked it will be hell. Hence it is called the “day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God” (<abbr>Rom.</abbr> 2:5). So, too, as death is a transition from the animal to the spiritual body, the “change” (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, 52. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:20, 21) or investiture (2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:2⁠–⁠4) is associated with the Coming of the Lord.</p>
				<p>The “Coming of the Lord,” then, is not merely a periphrasis for death. It is rather significant of a great fact or group of facts in the history of man, in connection with which, but of relative insignificance, is death. The termination of animal life, and consequently of the relations of our physical being, is among the conditions of the exercise of those higher functions by which Christ is seen as he is.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Scripture Argument</h3>
				<p>Will the Scriptures sustain us in the position we have now assumed? “To the law and to the testimony.”</p>
				<p>Just before the Saviour left the world, he told his disciples that he was about to be glorified; that this implied his departure from them; and that they could not then follow him (John 13:31⁠–⁠33). To mitigate the sorrow which this announcement gave them, he added, Let not your heart be troubled. You believe in God. Though unseen you believe in his presence and power to bless. You have <em>faith</em> in God, Henceforth have <em>faith in me</em> as you have faith in God. Though unseen, I shall be with you to bless you. And further, I am going to prepare a place for you, and will soon come and take you to myself, that where I am, there you may be also. This, Thomas understood literally. The Saviour corrects the mistake, and tells him he must not understand what he had said of going away topographically. The “way” to God and heaven was <em>the knowledge of Christ</em>. They, his disciples, knew something of him at present, and it was “life” and the earnest of heaven; but they should hereafter “know” him as they did not now. Now they knew him in his humiliation. And they knew him as of the same mode of existence as themselves. They knew him as they knew and were known of each other. But in being glorified he must change his mode of being, and pass into a state in which their senses could not perceive him. They would henceforth believe in him and know him as apprehended by faith, and their knowledge of him as thus obtained would be the knowledge of the Father⁠—<i xml:lang="el">ἀπάρτι γινώσκετε αὐτόν</i>. Besides, they would erelong experience the same change, and then they would know him, not by the exercise of faith merely, but directly, and in a manner analogous to sense. They would be like him, and therefore able to see him as he is (1 John 3:2). You will see me in my glory, and know me in my true character; and knowing me in my glory, you will know the Father in his glory.</p>
				<p>This we consider the substance of what Christ said to Thomas. Professor Stuart (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Bib.</abbr> Sacra</i>, 1852, <abbr>p.</abbr> 342), also such commentators as Doddridge, Kuinoel, Rosenmueller, understood the promise “I will come again” (verse 3), to refer to the death of the believer. That the Apostles understood it in this sense, is evident from the manner in which, in so many instances, they refer to it. “The Coming,” “The Revelation,” “The Appearing” of Christ were phrases most familiar, and full of sacred import. They became so familiar, as to be understood by only an allusion. “That day,” “The day,” were such allusions, and perfectly understood not only by Apostles, but by all to whom their epistles were addressed.</p>
				<p>The following are specimens of the manner in which the Apostles refer to this promise. The reference is made sometimes with one, and sometimes with another of the associate events in mind.</p>
				<p>1. The following refer to the close of the present life, considered as.a state of suffering, trial, or probation.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:23. “And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Nothing could be made plainer by any language than that the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ was to be either during or immediately in succession to the present life. It will not be claimed that it is to occur during the present life, since this would imply a point beyond which there is no need of praying to be preserved blameless. Then it must be in immediate succession to the present. For the <em>body</em> is to be preserved till, and found blameless when Christ appears. Christ is then to appear at the time of the close of the animal functions.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>James 5:7, 8. “Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. (8) Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Here Christians who were suffering oppression and persecution from the rich and powerful are exhorted to bear patiently their sufferings until (<i xml:lang="el">ἕως</i>, <em>until such time as</em>) the coming of the Lord. And moreover that coming was to be to them what the harvest is to the husbandman⁠—the day of reward, and can mean no other than the introduction to heaven. “Great is your reward in heaven.” And yet further: “The coming of the Lord <em>draweth nigh</em>” (<i xml:lang="el">ἤγγικε</i>, <em>has come near</em>⁠—a word that admits of no possible construction except <em>to draw nigh, to be near at hand</em>). As confirmatory of this, if confirmation be possible, it is added in the following verse, “The Judge standeth (<i xml:lang="el">ἕστηκεν</i>, <em>has stationed himself</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> <em>is now standing</em>) before the door.”</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Heb.</abbr> 9:28. “Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Here the appearing of Christ is to effect or result in (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) the salvation of those who are waiting (<i xml:lang="el">ἀπεκδεχομένοις</i>) for him. In other words it introduces them to heaven.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 6:13⁠–⁠15. “I give thee charge.⁠ ⁠… (14) That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: (15) Which in his times he shall shew, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Timothy is solemnly charged carefully to maintain and obey the gospel “<em>until</em> (<i xml:lang="el">μέχρι</i>) the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.” <i xml:lang="el">Μέχρι</i>, “a particle serving to mark a terminus ad quem, both of place and time. It differs therefore from <i xml:lang="el">ἄχρι</i>, in that <i xml:lang="el">ἄχρι</i> fixes the attention upon the whole duration up to the limit, leaving the further continuance undetermined; while <i xml:lang="el">μέχρι</i> refers solely to the limit, implying that the action <em>there terminates</em>.” ⁠—Robinson. The word then fixes the “appearing” at the termination of the fight of faith⁠—at death. And the following verse informs us that God will give to his people this manifestation of Christ “in his own <em>times</em>” (<i xml:lang="el">καιροῖς ἰδίοις</i>): not at any one time, but in “times” which his wisdom shall select for each individual Christian. It will be made to “each one in his own order” (<i xml:lang="el">ἕκαστος ἐν τῷ ἰδίῳ τάγματι</i>) 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:23. Here is a distinct recognition of the fact that each man is to “wait God’s time” for the appearing of Christ. Timothy like Titus was to be “looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ” (<abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:13). And meantime, to be strenuously engaged in the work of this educational world.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Phil.</abbr> 1:6. “Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Until” (<i xml:lang="el">ἄχρις</i>). This preposition implies continuance <em>through</em> the period indicated. The Apostle then is confident that their Christian growth will be continued <em>up to</em> the day of the Lord. What this growth is he afterwards explains (verses 9⁠–⁠11). And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more.⁠ ⁠… . that ye may be without offence with reference to (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>), or so as to be pronounced such in the day of Christ. The Apostle then is confident that the Philippians will grow in grace <em>up to the time</em> of the day of the Lord. The difference between this and 1 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 6:14 is this: Timothy was to toil on and keep the <em>end</em> in view. Hence the use of <i xml:lang="el">μέχρι</i>. Here the mind is upon the work of grace to be continued <em>all the way to</em> that end. Hence the use of <i xml:lang="el">ἄχρι</i>.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:20, 21. “For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: (21) Who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Conversation;” <i xml:lang="el">πολίτευμα</i>, <em>citizenship, life as a citizen</em>.</p>
				<p>“We look;” <i xml:lang="el">ἀπεκδεχόμεθα</i>, <em>look for in a state of waiting and strong desire</em>.</p>
				<p>This earnest looking and waiting is of course for the “Coming” and “Appearing” of the Saviour. This coming is from heaven, “from whence we look,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> When Christ shall appear, he will change our vile body, and thus deliver us from the ills that flesh is heir to.</p>
				<p>2. The following texts refer to the close of life with the Judgment as an associate event.</p>
				<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:12. “Behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.”</p>
				<p>The leading object of the Apocalypse seems to have been to give to the early Christians information in relation to the period of persecution through which the church was then passing. The Neronic persecution was soon to end. Indeed the entire period of persecution was to be comparatively of short duration. Still, while it continued, it would be severe, and faithful disciples would greatly need encouragement and patience. This encouragement would be found and this patience promoted by the consideration suggested in the text. These suffering saints would soon find themselves in the midst of the glories of “Christ in his kingdom” revealed. The coming of the Lord was near, and his rewards to the faithful would be great.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 John 2:28. “And now, little children, abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The Appearing and Coming are equivalent. The appearing is that which they are soon to witness, and they should be such as not to be confounded when brought into the presence of their Lord for judgment and final award. In the second verse of the following chapter the Apostle speaks of this appearing and the “change” by which we, as having borne the image of the earthly, “shall be like” the heavenly⁠—the Saviour (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:49). See <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:20, 21.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 4:4, 5. “He that judgeth me is the Lord. (5) Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The Coming of the Lord and the Judgment and bringing to light the things of darkness are associate.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:5. “Deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The great question of salvation or perdition 1s to be decided in “the day of the Lord Jesus.” But the “day of the Lord” is the day of death. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:2.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 3:12, 13. “And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: (13) To the end he may stablish your hearts unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>By the increase to abundance of love through the grace of Christ, it would follow as a result that their hearts or characters would be found blameless <i xml:lang="el">ἐν τῇ παρουσίᾳ</i>, <em>when Christ should come</em>. The verdict would then be pronounced. The Coming and the Judgment are associate events.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 1:7, 8. “So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: (8) Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Waiting for,” <i xml:lang="el">ἀπεκδεχομένους</i>, the same that is rendered “looking for” in <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 3:20. <abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:13. 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 3:12.</p>
				<p>“Coming,” <i xml:lang="el">ἀποκάλυψιν</i>, <em>revelation</em> or <em>manifestation</em>, literally <em>an uncovering</em>.</p>
				<p>Here, being enriched (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 4⁠–⁠6) with the gifts and graces of the Christian character prepares the possessor to stand in the attitude of waiting for the unveiling of the glory of Christ. And the Apostle expresses the confidence that the Saviour would confirm them in these graces “until” (<i xml:lang="el">ἕως</i>, so long as until) the end, so that they should be found blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, <i xml:lang="el">ἕως τέλους ἀνεγκλήτους ἐν τῇ ἡμέρᾳ</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <em>until the end blameless in the day</em>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> To be in the end blameless is to be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus. The end of life and the day of the Lord are synchronical. The day in which men are pronounced blameless or otherwise is the day of Judgment.</p>
				<p>3. The following texts refer to the close of life, and heaven as then having its commencement.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:36, 37. “Ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. (37) For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“A little while,” <i xml:lang="el">μικρὸν ὅσον ὅσον</i>, <em>a very, very little while</em>, and He that is to come (<i xml:lang="el">ὁ ἐρχόμενος</i>) will come. The reference is most certainly to John 14:3, “I will come again and receive you unto myself.” This is to be waited for with “patience.” And the assurance designed to strengthen and encourage hope, is, that the Saviour will come in a very short time. The language may be borrowed from <abbr>Hab.</abbr> 2:3, but the fact to which the language refers is that of John 14:3.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:12, 13. “We should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; (13) Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Looking with strong desire (<i xml:lang="el">προσδεχόμενοι</i>) for that object of our hope, the glorious appearing of the great God even our Saviour. The Coming of the Lord was the object then of hope and strong desire. But the object of the Christian’s hope is heaven as a world in which Christ will “appear” and be seen in glory.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:6, 7. “It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; (7) And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>When do believers come into the possession of the <em>rest</em> that remaineth for the people of God? When they rest from their labors. It is also contemporaneous with the recompensing of tribulation to the wicked. When did the “rich man” receive his recompense?</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 3:5. “The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:9, 10. “Ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God. (10) And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>To love God and to stand in the attitude of waiting for Christ are the characteristics of the Christian. And Christ is to be waited for as “raised from the dead.” But to see him as he is we must be like him; that is, the “change” must pass upon us. See in the chapter on the Resurrection, 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:51, 52, also 1 John 3:2. These Thessalonian Christians, then, were to wait for <em>that</em> to which death would introduce them⁠—the ability to see Christ as he is, to behold his glory.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 1:5⁠–⁠7. “Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. (6) Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if need be, ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations: (7) That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“The last time” is not to be confounded with “last times” as in <abbr>v.</abbr> 20, or 1 John 2:18 (<i xml:lang="el">ὥρα</i>), or Jude 18, where the Christian dispensation is indicated, as also in the phrase “last days” <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 1:12. The “last time” is equivalent to “the last day” of John 6:39, 40, 44, 54; 12:48.</p>
				<p>Salvation was “ready,” in waiting to be revealed. If it be supposed “the last time” implied a time many thousands of years in the future, it were absurd to speak of it as <em>ready</em> (<i xml:lang="el">ἑτοίμην</i>) to be revealed.</p>
				<p>“Wherein,” that is, in the fact that salvation is ready to be revealed.</p>
				<p>“A season,” <i xml:lang="el">ὀλίγον ἄρτι</i>, literally <em>a little now</em>⁠—a most emphatic method of saying a very little time; as in <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:37. 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 4:17. The appearing of Jesus Christ <abbr>v.</abbr> 7, and the revelation of salvation <abbr>v.</abbr> 5, are associate facts. See <abbr>v.</abbr> 13, “Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.”</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 Peter 4:13. “Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Here the joy of heaven is contrasted with the sufferings of earth. But heaven begins at death: “Today shalt thou be with me in paradise.” Then the revelation of Christ will be at death. See <abbr>vs.</abbr> 5, 7.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 4:6⁠–⁠8. “I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. (7) I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: (8) Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Compare this with what Paul says, <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 1:23, “I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.” Was not that desire to come into possession of what he here calls “a crown of righteousness?” Then is this crown to be conferred at death⁠—“at that day.” And not to Paul only, but to all others who, like him, “love his appearing.” It is here also as in 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:9, 10 above, to be noticed that love for “the appearing of Christ” is one of the primary traits and distinguishing elements of Christian character.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 Peter 5:4. “When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Was the encouragement administered in this language to be found in a fact thousands of years hence?</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p><abbr>Rom.</abbr> 13:11, 12. “And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. (12) The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>What is meant by salvation as near, and the day as at hand? It must, it does refer to the fact that life is short, and death, with its associate events, is near. Heaven⁠—“the revelation,” “the appearing,” “the being present” (<i xml:lang="el">παρουσία</i>) of the Lord Jesus Christ is near. The day of the Lord is at hand. The crown is in waiting. Salvation is ready to be revealed. The intervening time of trial and suffering is “but for a moment”⁠—“a very, very little time.”</p>
				<p>4. The following text refers to the close of life, and hell as then having its commencement.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 5:2⁠–⁠4. “Yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. (3) For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then sudden destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. (4) But ye, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“The day of the Lord” is a phrase we have considered. In this text the good are represented as having an interest in it. It will come suddenly, but they are not in darkness, that, like a thief, it should find them unprepared. The wicked have an interest in it, but in the infatuation of sin they cry, Peace and safety. But <em>while thus crying</em>⁠—it cannot be when, like the “rich man,” they are in torment, but must be in this life when alone unbelief and insensibility is possible⁠—sudden destruction comes upon them. They die, and awake⁠—in hell. Verse 23, already quoted, shows that it is the end of life when the bodily functions cease, that is referred to. “I pray God your whole spirit and soul <em>and body</em> be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” The period between this and the day of the Lord is covered by the experience of the animal impulses.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Objections</h3>
				<p>But we shall be met by the objection, that while the texts above quoted might bear and seem to require the construction put upon them, there are other texts where the same phraseology occurs, which forbid this construction. And we are referred to 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:13⁠–⁠17. 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:6⁠–⁠10; 2:1⁠–⁠5. 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 2:4; 3:3⁠–⁠18. Jude 6. These texts therefore we will carefully examine.</p>
				<p>1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:13⁠–⁠17 as it bears more especially on the doctrine of the Resurrection, will be examined in the chapter on that subject.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:6⁠–⁠10</p>
					</header>
					<p>“It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; (7) And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, (8) In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: (9) Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; (10) When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed), in that day.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>We have already referred to such parts of the above as relate to the “rest” which, after the afflictions that are “but for a moment” have passed by, awaits the good. But “<em>when</em>” this “rest” begins, begins also the punishment with everlasting destruction of the wicked. If the former, so also the latter begins with the close of life⁠—when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels.</p>
				<p>The difficulty with the objector is to reconcile the bold imagery of this language with the event of death. But it should be remembered that the theory of these pages makes death, with its associate facts⁠—the Anastasis, the Parousia, the Judgment⁠—the great and all-important event of our being. And if ever, and on any subject, the writer, whose style had been formed under the influence of the Hebrew Scriptures, would employ the terms of a sublime imagery, it would be on this very subject⁠—of all others in the Bible, of the most oppressive and overwhelming importance.</p>
				<p>The reader familiar with the <i xml:lang="la">usus loquendi</i> of the Old Testament, will be prepared to expect, on this hypothesis, just such language as we find. He will call to mind such texts as the following: <abbr>Deut.</abbr> 33:2. Psalms 50, 83 and 97. <abbr>Isa.</abbr> 30:33; 66:15. <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:9, 10; also <abbr>Deut.</abbr> 4:24; 9:3. And of the above texts, if the objector will read and <em>understand</em> only Psalm 50, and then admit that much of this same style of composition is found in the Old Testament, he will be prepared to accept such imagery as that in 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:6⁠–⁠10 in describing the facts assumed in our exegesis. Fire is the symbol of God’s vindicatory justice (<abbr>Heb.</abbr> 12:29).</p>
				<p>The objection found in the figurative language being then removed, we are prepared to look at some of the phraseology which may fix the time referred to. It is “<em>when</em>” the believer enters into “<em>rest</em>;” which we have seen is at death. It is at the time of the “revelation” (<i xml:lang="el">ἐν τῇ ἀποκαλύψει</i>) of the Lord Jesus; which is also at death. It is in “that day,” which we have seen was one of the forms of expression used to denote the Parousia. It will be admitted by all that the same facts and the same time of their occurrence are referred to, as in the beginning of the following chapter, as also in chapters 4 and 5 of the first Epistle; so that whatever exegesis disposes of them, will take this also.</p>
				<table>
					<thead>
						<th colspan="2">
							<p>2 Thessalonians 2:1⁠–⁠9</p>
						</th>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἐρωτῶμεν δὲ ὑμᾶς, ἀδελφοί, ὑπὲρ τῆς παρουσίας τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ καὶ ἡμῶν ἐπισυναγωγῆς ἐπ’ αὐτὸν (2) εἰς τὸ μὴ ταχέως σαλευθῆναι ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ νοὸς μηδὲ θροεῖσθαι, μήτε διὰ πνεύματος μήτε διὰ λόγου μήτε δι’ ἐπιστολῆς ὡς δι’ ἡμῶν, ὡς ὅτι ἐνέστηκεν ἡ ἡμέρα τοῦ κυρίου. (3) μή τις ὑμᾶς ἐξαπατήσῃ κατὰ μηδένα τρόπον· ὅτι ἐὰν μὴ ἔλθῃ ἡ ἀποστασία πρῶτον καὶ ἀποκαλυφθῇ ὁ ἄνθρωπος τῆς ἀνομίας, ὁ υἱὸς τῆς ἀπωλείας, (4) ὁ ἀντικείμενος καὶ ὑπεραιρόμενος ἐπὶ πάντα λεγόμενον θεὸν ἢ σέβασμα ὥστε αὐτὸν εἰς τὸν ναὸν τοῦ θεοῦ καθίσαι ἀποδεικνύντα ἑαυτὸν ὅτι ἔστιν θεός. (5) Οὐ μνημονεύετε ὅτι ἔτι ὢν πρὸς ὑμᾶς ταῦτα ἔλεγον ὑμῖν; 6 καὶ νῦν τὸ κατέχον οἴδατε εἰς τὸ ἀποκαλυφθῆναι αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ἑαυτοῦ καιρῷ. 7 τὸ γὰρ μυστήριον ἤδη ἐνεργεῖται τῆς ἀνομίας, μόνον ὁ κατέχων ἄρτι ἕως ἐκ μέσου γένηται· 8 καὶ τότε ἀποκαλυφθήσεται ὁ ἄνομος ὃν ὁ κύριος Ἰησοῦς ἀνελεῖ τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ καὶ καταργήσει τῇ ἐπιφανείᾳ τῆς παρουσίας αὐτοῦ· 9 οὗ ἐστιν ἡ παρουσία κατ’ ἐνέργειαν τοῦ σατανᾶ ἐν πάσῃ δυνάμει καὶ σημείοις καὶ τέρασιν ψεύδους.</td>
							<td>Now we beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, (2) That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. (3) Let no man deceive you by any means, for <em>that day shall not come</em>, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, (4) Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God, sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. (5) Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things? (6) And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time. (7) For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now letteth, <em>will let</em>, until he be taken out of the way. (8) And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming: (9) <em>Even him</em> whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>The following is submitted as the correct translation.</p>
				<p>And, brethren, concerning the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our being gathered unto him, we pray you (2) not to be hastily unsettled in mind, nor troubled either by [pretended revelations of the] Spirit, or by word or letter as from us, seeing that the day of the Lord is near. (3) Let no one deceive you by any means. For, if the apostasy do not first come, and the wicked man be not revealed⁠—the son of perdition, (4) who puts himself in opposition to and is exalted above all that is called God or an object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, pretending that he is God⁠—<em>what then?</em> (5) Do you not remember that when yet with you I told you these things? (6) You know what now restrains so as that he shall be brought into notice and influence in his time. (7) For this species of sin, hitherto unknown to the church, is in secret operation. He who is restraining, is doing it only for the present, until he may be removed. (8) And then the lawless man will come into open activity⁠—whom the Lord Jesus shall destroy with the breath of his mouth, and render powerless by the splendor of his presence⁠—(9) <em>even he</em> whose career is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders.</p>
				<p>“Concerning the Coming” <abbr>v.</abbr> 1, <i xml:lang="el">ὑπὲρ τῆς παρουσίας</i>. As authority for this rendering, it is sufficient to name Rosenmueller, Winer, and Robinson. <i xml:lang="el">Ὑπέρ</i> would never have been rendered “by,” but for the necessities of a theological system.</p>
				<p>“Unsettled in mind,” <i xml:lang="el">σαλευθῆναι ὑμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ νοὸς</i>, literally, <em>shaken from the mind</em>. We might understand mind in the sense of opinion. <i xml:lang="el">Νοῦς</i> has sometimes that meaning as in 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 1:10. The opinion referred to would be that of the Coming of the Lord as near. The Apostle took great pains in all his writings, that the disciples should have an opinion on this great subject. “I solemnly declare to you, before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who is now about to judge the living and the dead, both his Coming and his Kingdom.” 2 <abbr>Tim.</abbr> 4:1.⁠— Knapp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la"><abbr>Nov. Test.</abbr> Alii</i>. So in his first epistle to the Thessalonians, “I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope” (4:13), The Apostle had evidently been misunderstood in what on a former occasion he had said on the subject of the Parousia. And it is to these misapprehensions that he refers in this chapter.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> What specifically the errors needing correction were, we cannot know, except as they may be inferred from the allusions here made to them. Paul, it would seem, had informed them, that heretical opinions of a serious kind, would find their way into the church, and for a time prevail; but that the Lord would destroy them “with the brightness of his <em>coming</em>.” (<i xml:lang="el">παρουσία</i>)⁠—coming in the sense of a <em>moral manifestation</em>. It may be that the church confounded this term (<i xml:lang="el">παρουσία</i>) as thus used, with the same word used with a different signification, as in <abbr>v.</abbr> 1, and had supposed that <strong>The Parousia</strong> was not to come till after the long period of the gradual incoming and as gradual removal of this heresy. Hence the language of the Apostle in <abbr>v.</abbr> 3 <abbr class="eoc">seq.</abbr> The church, if admitting the fact of the Parousia, might have supposed it in the distance, and beyond the time of their own death, and consequently had erroneous views of it. Or they might have doubted the fact. It was a doctrine denied by the unbelieving world. When those died who had believed in it, and been waiting for it, scoffers asked, “Where is the promise of his Coming?”⁠—understanding it, as modern commentators do, to refer to a physical catastrophe of the world.</p>
				<p>If, however, we understand <i xml:lang="el">σαλευθῆναι ἀπὸ τοῦ νοός</i> in the sense of being agitated, deprived of self-possession, the doctrine of the context will not be affected. The Thessalonians would be disturbed, not by the prospect of the speedy Coming of the Lord, but rather by the fear of delay. This was true of the primitive Christians generally. The Apostles had little occasion to admonish them to be ready for “that day,” but rather that they be patient and wait for it. And the assurance so often given, that the day of the Lord was at hand, was designed for their consolation rather than admonition.</p>
				<p>Nothing, then, could be more in keeping with the circumstances of the case, or the spirit and demands of the times, than that the Apostle should attempt to allay the agitations of the Thessalonian Christians, by assuring them that the day of the Lord was just at hand.</p>
				<p>“Seeing that” <abbr>v.</abbr> 2, <i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i>. To everyone familiar with the language of Apostles, the presumption is that this is the true rendering. We expect the inspired writers will not contradict themselves and each other. But the common rendering is in direct conflict with other inspired assertions, and with the entire drift of apostolic writing. Thus, James 4:7, 8, “Be patient, brethren, until (<i xml:lang="el">ἕως</i>) the Coming of the Lord⁠ ⁠… for the Coming of the Lord draweth nigh” (<i xml:lang="el">ἤγγικε</i>, <em>has already come near</em>). <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 4:5, “The Lord is at hand” (<i xml:lang="el">ἐγγύς</i>, <em>near</em>). 1 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 4:7, “The end (<i xml:lang="el">τέλος</i>, <em>consummation</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> of all that relates to the individual) of all things is at hand (<i xml:lang="el">ἤγγικε</i>).” <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:37, “Yet a little while (<i xml:lang="el">μικρὸν ὅσον ὅσον</i>, <em>very very little</em>) and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.” <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:20, “Surely I come quickly” (<i xml:lang="el">Ναί ἔρχομαι ταχύ</i>).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></p>
				<p>The phrase <i>ὡς ὅτι</i> occurs but in two other instances in the New Testament, 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:19 and 11:21. The first, Winer considers as causal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> That it is so is obvious. “Hath committed to us the ministry (<i xml:lang="el">διακονίαν</i>, literally, <em>the office of ministering</em>) of the reconciliation; seeing that (<i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i>) God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to men their trespasses.” Obviously <i xml:lang="el">διακονίαν</i> (ministry) cannot be in apposition to the clause “God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This latter is evidently designed as a <em>reason why</em> this ministry is committed to the Apostles and Christians. There could be no such ministry but for this great fundamental fact of the Christian scheme.</p>
				<p>That 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 11:21 is to be construed in the same manner, is probable. Of exegeses multitudinous, we know of none more satisfactory than that which translates <i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i> as causal: “We speak concerning reproach, seeing that we have been weak.” As confirmatory of this, see <abbr>vs.</abbr> 29⁠–⁠33, and especially as translated by Conybeare.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> See also <abbr>chap.</abbr> 12:7⁠–⁠10. And it may be remarked that <i xml:lang="el">ἀσθένεια</i> (weakness) and its kindred adjective and verb, are in the Septuagint used to denote weakness in the sense, not of an amount less than the average of corporeal or mental strength, but as indicating an inability to endure or sustain the calamities and afflictions which are brought in the providence of God. This use of the word passes into the New Testament. Paul in this sense was “weak.” But he had the promise, “My grace is sufficient for thee.” Most gladly, therefore, did he glory in his weaknesses (<i xml:lang="el">ἀσθενείας</i>).</p>
				<p>The following is submitted as probably the import of <abbr>vs.</abbr> 18⁠–⁠22. Since many boast of their earthly relations and condition (<i xml:lang="el">κατὰ τὴν σάρκα</i>), I will boast also. (19) Good-naturedly ye bear with the foolish, ye being wise. (20) Ye bear it even if anyone make slaves of you; if anyone take from you by extortion; if anyone take from you by violence; if anyone sets himself above you [<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> treats you with contempt]; if anyone smites you in the face [referring, probably, in these cases, to some things done by the false teachers]. (21) I speak [<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> I am about to say some things of my ancestry, relations, and history] on account of dishonor [cast upon me and my fellow laborers]; <em>seeing that</em> we are weak [and may seem to you, sometimes, as if abandoned of God]. But (<i xml:lang="el">δέ</i> antithetic) in this respect [though weak in some sense], if any man is resolute, I more: [I am ready to say the truth] (and you may call me a fool). (22) Are they [the false teachers] Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
				<p>Classic usage sustains us. <i xml:lang="el">Κατηγόρουν αὐτοῦ ὡς ὅτι καινὰ δαιμόνια εἰςφέρει</i>, <em>because</em> or <em>seeing that</em> he introduced new gods. <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">Isoc.</abbr> <i xml:lang="la"><abbr>orat. argum.</abbr></i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 362.</p>
				<p>We have but to adopt the same translation of <i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i> in 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:2. The Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians not to be shaken in mind, or abandon their opinion so important and so full of encouragement and consolation to the suffering disciples, concerning the Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ and their being gathered around him as the blessed subjects of his heavenly administration; <em>seeing that</em> the day of the Lord is at hand. They must not allow themselves to be deceived by the false reasoning of errorists. This is in keeping with texts like the following: 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 1:7,8. 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 1:9, 10. 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 3:5. <abbr>Tit.</abbr> 2:12, 13.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></p>
				<p>“The wicked man,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 3. This, strange to say, has been applied to the Pope. The language in the connection is not a prediction of events in the distant future, but <em>an allusion to events then transpiring</em>. It was a man, a single wicked man, plotting evil. He was held in check by the influence of another single man (<i xml:lang="el">ὁ κατέχων</i>) who would soon be removed, and thus give to this errorist the ground for his unopposed work. And he would act himself out (<i xml:lang="el">ἀποκαλυφθήσεται</i>). But his career would be short. The Lord would destroy him by the breath of his mouth.</p>
				<p>It is surprising that even in the days of the Reformation, when the Bible was made to say a great deal about the Pope, it should be thought that Popery could have had its beginning here in Macedonia, and in the day of persecution. And still more surprising that such an exegesis should have come down to our day. This is not a solitary instance of the influence of an errorist disturbing the early churches. Those in Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, and Colosse, evidently suffered in the same way. That this language has any reference to the Pope is a pure assumption. We have the same right, and as much reason, to apply it to Arminius, or Swedenborg, or Joe Smith. The early Christians applied it to Nero.</p>
				<p>“<em>What then?</em>” <abbr>v.</abbr> 4. The preceding sentence is an instance of aposiopesis. So Knapp.</p>
				<p>“This species of sin hitherto unknown to the church,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 7. This rendering is paraphrastic, and may seem somewhat liberal; but all this is contained in <i xml:lang="el">τὸ μυστήριον</i>.</p>
				<p>The reference in <abbr>v.</abbr> 8 is evidently to a merely moral manifestation of the Saviour.</p>
				<p>We see, then, that 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2:1⁠–⁠5, so far from militating against our position, does, when rightly understood, support it directly and most emphatically. The Thessalonians are solemnly admonished not to give up their belief in the great fact of the Appearing and Kingdom of Christ; and are assured that the day of the Lord is near.</p>
				<table>
					<thead>
						<th colspan="2">
							<p>2 Peter 3:3⁠–⁠9</p>
						</th>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">Ἐλεύσονται ἐπ’ ἐσχάτων τῶν ἡμερῶν ἐν ἐμπαιγμονῇ ἐμπαῖκται κατὰ τὰς ἰδίας ἐπιθυμίας αὐτῶν πορευόμενοι, (4) καὶ λέγοντες· Ποῦ ἐστιν ἡ ἐπαγγελία τῆς παρουσίας αὐτοῦ; ἀφ’ ἧς γὰρ οἱ πατέρες ἐκοιμήθησαν, πάντα οὕτως διαμένει ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς κτίσεως.</td>
							<td>There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, (4) And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">(5) Λανθάνει γὰρ αὐτοὺς τοῦτο θέλοντας ὅτι οὐρανοὶ ἦσαν ἔκπαλαι καὶ γῆ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ δι’ ὕδατος συνεστῶσα τῷ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγῳ, (6) δι’ ὧν ὁ τότε κόσμος ὕδατι κατακλυσθεὶς ἀπώλετο. (7) οἱ δὲ νῦν οὐρανοὶ καὶ ἡ γῆ τῷ αὐτῷ λόγῳ τεθησαυρισμένοι εἰσὶν, πυρὶ τηρούμενοι εἰς ἡμέραν κρίσεως καὶ ἀπωλείας τῶν ἀσεβῶν ἀνθρώπων.</td>
							<td>(5) For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water, and in the water, (6) Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished. (7) But the heavens and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td xml:lang="el">(8) Ἓν δὲ τοῦτο μὴ λανθανέτω ὑμᾶς, ἀγαπητοί, ὅτι μία ἡμέρα παρὰ Κυρίῳ ὡς χίλια ἔτη, καὶ χίλια ἔτη ὡς ἡμέρα μία. (9) οὐ βραδύνει ὁ Κύριος τῆς ἐπαγγελίας, ὥς τινες βραδύτητα ἡγοῦνται· ἀλλὰ μακροθυμεῖ εἰς ὑμᾶς, μὴ βουλόμενός τινας ἀπολέσθαι, ἀλλὰ πάντας εἰς μετάνοιαν χωρῆσαι.</td>
							<td>(8) But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. (9) The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness, but is longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>This is supposed to conflict with the theory now advocated. But, like 2 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 2, it needs but a correct exegesis, and it becomes to us a pillar of support. Our rendering is as follows.</p>
				<p>There shall come in the last days shameless scoffers, governed by their own depraved impulses, (4) and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for, since the old men have died, all things continue as from the beginning of the creation.</p>
				<p>(5) It does not occur to those who think thus, that the heavens were of long standing; and [that] the earth, by divinely established laws, [was] constructed from the water by the action of water; (6) so that the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished. (7) But the present heavens and earth, by the same laws, are preserved as a treasure, kept by fire with reference to a day of judgment and of perdition of ungodly men.</p>
				<p>(8) Do not forget, brethren, this one thing, that, with the Lord, one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. (9) The Lord is not slow in the sense in which some use the term, but is longsuffering towards us, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.</p>
				<blockquote>
					<header>
						<p>Verses 10⁠–⁠17</p>
					</header>
					<p>“But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up. (11) Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, (12) Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat? (13) Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. (14) Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. (15) And account that the longsuffering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also according to the wisdom given unto him hath written unto you; (16) As also in all his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. (17) Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Scoffers,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 3. These persons were “evidently, like the Thessalonians who had misunderstood Paul, Greeks, or at any rate not familiar with the Hebrew idiom. Hence they had understood the language the Apostle had on some occasion used, or it may be the language of some other Apostle, or of the church of that day (<abbr>v.</abbr> 4), in relation to the Coming of the Lord, as implying a physical catastrophe⁠—very much like the modern notions of the end of the world. They had construed such language as <abbr>vs.</abbr> 10⁠–⁠12 literally.</p>
				<p>“Where is the promise?” <abbr>v.</abbr> 4. What has become of it? It has not been fulfilled.</p>
				<p>“Since the old men have died,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 4. It would seem that these fathers in the church had been in the habit of speaking of the Coming of the Lord, and of themselves as “waiting for” that event. The irreligious scoffers had, as we have said, understood this language literally. These men had died, and the event which they had been understood to be waiting for had not come to pass. They claimed, therefore, they had proof that this new religion was unreal, and its pretensions to be resisted.</p>
				<p>“It does not occur,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>v.</abbr> 5. The argument of the Apostle here is, that there are objections against understanding literally the figurative language of the heavens passing away with a crash. The heavens were no temporary structure of recent origin. They were of long standing (<i xml:lang="el">ἔκπαλαι</i>) even at the time of the flood, and it were absurd to suppose they were now, as a part of human history to come to an end. And this is certainly the inference of an intelligent astronomy. There are few things that we have read with greater astonishment than the following sentence from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Knapp (Theology, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 214). “When the present state of the world shall cease, the greatest revolutions will take place in the whole universe, 2 Peter 3:7, 10⁠–⁠13.” Geology utters a language scarcely less emphatic against the hypothesis of a catastrophe such as is advocated. President Hitchcock has indeed attempted to reconcile such catastrophe with the facts of Geology and the truths of the Bible; but the result of his effort is, that the heaven in which the saints shall finally be placed is to be a “lake of fire and brimstone!” ⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of Geology</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 378, 398‒402.</p>
				<p>“The earth,⁠ ⁠… constructed from the water by the action of water,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 5, <i xml:lang="el">γῆ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ δι’ ὕδατος συνεστῶσα</i>, literally put together from water by water. We understand the Apostle to affirm that the country occupied by the anitediluvians was alluvial, and but a little above the level of the waters of the region: and that as a consequence (<i xml:lang="el">δι’ ὧν</i>) the country could be submerged. This country was probably what is now the valley of the Euphrates and Tigris, modified by certain geological changes that occurred at the time of the deluge. We learn from the history of the flood (<abbr>Gen.</abbr> 7:20) that the waters prevailed but “fifteen cubits upward,” yet the mountains were covered, and at such depth as to destroy all animal life. The country, therefore, must have been very level. And a slight upheaval of some portion, or a slight depression, or perhaps both in different places⁠—such as is known often to have occurred in the history of the planet, is ample cause for all that is recorded as the effects of the deluge.</p>
				<p>That geological changes of the kind indicated did occur at the time, is inferred from the geographical notices in <abbr>Gen.</abbr> 2:10⁠–⁠14. The book of Genesis is evidently a compilation from preexisting materials, and we may suppose this to have come down from the antediluvian period, and to have been transferred unaltered. When written it was of course descriptive of places and rivers as they then were. But it can have no application to the facts of the post-diluvian world. Nor are we to suppose the names to be of the same rivers that now bear them. Noah and his family would be likely to take the names of antediluvian rivers and apply them to those of their own day, much as we of New England apply to places and rivers the names so appropriated in the mother country.</p>
				<p>We have, then, the two facts, a level country and geological changes; which are a sufficient explanation of the flood and its effects in destroying the race. These facts the Apostle says, the scoffers either did not know or ignored (<i xml:lang="el">λανθάνει</i>). The catastrophe and destruction of the race were at that time possible.</p>
				<p>“<em>But</em>,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 7 (<i xml:lang="el">δέ</i> adversative), such a catastrophe is now out of the question. The world as now it is through the agency of fire, is not liable to any such changes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> but is kept as a treasure, and though men are now, as before the flood, wicked, yet it is not God’s design to punish them in the methods he then employed. The world is “kept” with reference to (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) a day of judgment and perdition in a future state. God will then vindicate his justice. And it is now, as it was not in the earlier periods of the race, distinctly revealed that there is such a state, and that it is to be retributive (Acts 17:30, 31). So that though God bears long with the wicked, and permits them to know no bands in their death, yet does not his government suffer, or his authority lose its force. That <i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i> may be rendered “<em>with reference to</em>,” see <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 4:16. Acts 25:20. <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 4:20. <abbr>Eph.</abbr> 4:15. Luke 12:19. <abbr>Gal.</abbr> 6:4. 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 11:10, and Winer, §53(a). For the rendering “The earth⁠ ⁠… constructed from the water by the action of water” (<i xml:lang="el">γῆ ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ δι’ ὕδατος συνεστῶσα</i>), see Winer, §54, <abbr>p.</abbr> 331. Of <i xml:lang="el">ὕδατι</i> (water), and <i xml:lang="el">πυρί</i> (fire), in the sentences “overflowed by water” and “kept by fire,” if the one is to be rendered as cause and with the preposition <em>by</em>, so must the other. The construction is the same in each case.</p>
				<p>“Heavens,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 7. Not in the astronomical sense, but as then understood⁠—a part of the world (<i xml:lang="el">κόσμος</i>.)</p>
				<p>“Kept by fire,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 7. We prefer the reading which connects <i xml:lang="el">πυρί</i> with <i xml:lang="el">τηρούμενοι</i>. See Knapp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la"><abbr>Nov. Test.</abbr> Alii</i>.</p>
				<p>Verses 8, 9. With <abbr>v.</abbr> 7, the Apostle closes his reply to the scoffers, and again addresses his “beloved” brethren. The time in which wicked men are permitted to pursue their career may seem to them long. But they should remember it does not seem so to Him who sees the end from the beginning. With the Lord a thousand years are as one day, and one day as a thousand years. And that God allows bad men so long to escape unpunished is because he is not willing that any should perish: he gives them time and reiterated offers of reconciliation and mercy. “Slow, in the sense in which some use the term,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 9⁠—in the sense of <em>dilatory</em>.</p>
				<p>Verse 10. But though punishment is delayed, it will come, and come suddenly, and be such as to authorize the language of bold imagery, which Christians have been taught to employ, but which the scoffers have misunderstood or criminally perverted; and which is yet appropriate and in keeping with the style of the Old Testament Scriptures. The day of the Lord will come as a thief, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burned up.</p>
				<p>Let the reader turn to <abbr>Deut.</abbr> 32:22. <abbr>Jer.</abbr> 15:14; 17:4. <abbr>Lam.</abbr> 4:11, and many other similar texts, and he will see that the men whose style was formed by and whose allusions were to the Hebrew Scriptures, would use just such language as Peter has used in the circumstances.</p>
				<p>Verses 11⁠–⁠17. This great doctrine has its application to Christians. Since all these things are so soon to pass away, and since they are to be succeeded by a glorious and spiritual Administration of the Lord, it follows as an inference that Christians should put practically a very low estimate upon the present, so transient as it is, and give out all their desires and affections upon the future, longing for the realization of the promised good. New heavens and a new earth are promised. To the saints the power of perception and enjoyment will be so greatly enlarged, that the heavens and the earth will be new to them, though unchanged. And they must now be constantly using the greatest care to be such that when Christ shall appear, they may be found immaculate, blameless. And if this period of painful watching is prolonged, they must consider it a part of that administration which also spares the impenitent with reference to their salvation. What is painful watching and struggling and waiting to the good, is salvation to the wicked. It gives them space for repentance. “The longsuffering of our Lord is salvation,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 15.</p>
				<p>The allusion to Paul as in his epistles, speaking on this subject things hard to be understood, authorizes us to apply what Paul has said of “The Coming of the Lord,” to this subject as presented by Peter; as also the explanations we have given of Paul. They both refer to the same thing by the <i xml:lang="el">παρουσία τοῦ κυρίου</i>.</p>
				<p>Nothing can be plainer than that what is here said must of necessity refer to what was just at hand, and for which the persons addressed were to stand in the attitude of waiting, and were to wait till it came. The delay was not because the Lord was slack in fulfilling his promise to Christians, but because he was forbearing to the wicked and would save them (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 9, 15); the day of the Lord would come as a thief; the exhortation to be spiritual and to stand not only waiting for but hastening the coming of the day⁠—to be found in peace and spotless when the day comes⁠—these all <em>must</em> mean that the event was to come to them while in the flesh. The supposition that it refers to a catastrophe that was thousands of years in the future, is absurd. It is doing violence to the word of God. It is “taking away from the words of the book,” <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:19.</p>
				<p>“If the ‘end of the world’ is not taught in 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 3, it is not taught in the Bible.” So said a distinguished living theologian to the writer. With great veneration for the many good men who have taught us a different doctrine, we respectfully submit that it is not taught here. The Bible is entirely silent in regard to the future geological history of the globe we inhabit, as also any astronomical changes. While we have great reverence for <strong>man</strong> as made in the image of God, and as capable of such an amazing future of expansion and glory, we are yet to be persuaded that any great changes in the stellary world are to attend upon any changes in his condition. It is a dream⁠—that the sun and the moon and the stars shall make obeisance to man.</p>
				<p>Are we asked what is to become of the earth? We answer, we do not know⁠—any more than we know what is to become of Jupiter, or any one or all of the fixed stars. The earth has been in existence probably many millions of years. We know no reason why it should not exist forever. It has been and now is the subject of perpetual change. To what these changes shall ultimately lead, God has not told us. They may be eternal, and furnish in endless variety and increasing splendor and power of impression the manifestations of the wisdom, power, and love of the Creator⁠—a spectacle to angels and to men made perfect.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Locality of Heaven</h3>
				<p>As we have had frequent occasion to allude to the locality of heaven, it may be well in this connection to ask more definitely for information at the page of inspiration. It is a very common opinion that heaven is locally at a great distance. The earliest song of the little one is:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“There is a happy land</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Far, far away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where saints in glory stand</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bright, bright as day.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And older ones have sung:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span>“High in yonder realms of light</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwell the raptured saints above.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">What is the teaching of the Bible on this subject?</p>
				<p>So far as there are any references to location, the Scriptures seem to place heaven upon or in connection with earth. The ancients knew nothing of any other place. Much of the phraseology of the Bible in relation to a future state is derived from the opinions of the surrounding nations. Previous to the coming of Christ it had been no object of inspiration to reveal a future world. Yet there had been a gradual growth of that idea among the Chosen People, and that growth seems attributable to their intercourse with the inhabitants of other countries. Of course, then, the phraseology in which their conceptions would be clothed was foreign. For instance, Hades (<i xml:lang="el">ᾅδης</i>) Acts 2:27, Tartarus (<i xml:lang="el">ταρταρώσας</i>, verb from <i xml:lang="el">τάρταρος</i>), 2 <abbr>Pet.</abbr> 2:4. So of Paradise (<i xml:lang="el">παράδεισος</i>), Heaven (<i xml:lang="el">οὐρανός</i>). The heaven of the ancients was the regions above us; first, the expanse in which the birds fly and the clouds float; next, the solid concave hemisphere in which the stars are fixed; and thirdly, the region directly above, where the gods were supposed to dwell. To this last the good were finally taken. To these conceptions not only was the language of the Scriptures conformed, but also the providence of God. Elijah went <em>up</em> in a chariot of fire. Christ went <em>up</em>, and a cloud received him out of sight. Christ had said (John 20:17), “I <em>ascend</em> unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.”</p>
				<p>There are, however, certain <em>facts</em> stated in the Scriptures, that bear more directly and decisively on the question. Christ, speaking of angels as guardian agents to his disciples, says: “Their angels in heaven (<i xml:lang="el">οἱ ἄγγελοι αὐτῶν ἐν οὐρανοῖς</i>) do always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven” (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 18:10), implying that while ministering to those who shall be heirs of salvation they do, at the same time, behold the face of God in heaven. Heaven, then, is a <em>state</em> rather than a <em>place</em>. But the place in this instance is where living men are found. Throughout the entire book of Revelation, the angels and the departed saints are represented as directly observing all that transpires on earth, and as moving and acting in the midst of the transactions of earth. Paul (<abbr>Heb.</abbr> 12:22⁠–⁠24) represents the Christian as brought, by his faith, to Mount Zion, to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; to an innumerable multitude, the general assembly of angels; to the church of the first begotten enrolled in heaven; to God the Judge of all; to spirits of just men perfected, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This would seem to imply the mingling together of the good of both worlds. By faith we see these objects and feel their power, and are in the midst of them. Paul elsewhere speaks of “the whole family in heaven and upon earth.” The conversation between Christ and Thomas, John 14:1 <abbr>seq.</abbr> is in point. Thomas understood the Saviour to be literally “going away.” This Christ denies, and tells him for substance that heaven is not a distant place, but it is to be realized by a full knowledge of Christ himself. The disciples had known something of him in this his state of humiliation. But he was soon to be invested with glory. They, too, would soon, by a change in the mode of their existence, be possessed of new powers, and, as a consequence, would know him as they did not now: and seeing his glory, they would see the glory of the Father also. And this would be heaven. Christ was not going away, literally, and they to follow him. He was to unveil his glory, and they were to be made capable of seeing it. The realization of heaven would not imply a change of place, but of state. They must throw off this earthly house of their tabernacle. The mortal must put on immortality.</p>
				<p>In keeping with this is the language under consideration in this Chapter. “The Coming” (being present) of Christ, the Appearing of Christ, the Manifestation of Christ, all represent Christ as the actor, and appearing to the disciple, not the disciple to Christ; and the scene is therefore on the earth⁠—the place where the disciple now lives.</p>
				<p>The simple import of 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:14⁠–⁠17 is that God is soon to come to us, and bring with him, under the conduct of an Archangel, all the heavenly hosts, and among these our friends who have died before us. We do not <em>go up</em> to heaven; heaven <em>comes down</em> to us. The scene is here⁠—in the atmosphere of this world. These bodies are laid aside, and with our spiritual bodies we move “in clouds” of the sky. See remarks on this text in the Chapter on the Resurrection.</p>
				<p>We would not, however, wish to be understood to imply because heaven may be and sometimes is on earth, that therefore it must be there and forever. “The heavens declare the glory of God.” The remotest stars that the telescope brings to our knowledge, and much more the heavenly bodies nearer, are in relations of interest to us. They are bound to us by ties indissoluble; ties that strengthen with years, and which death will not destroy. We long to know more of those distant worlds. And could we, we should there, doubtless, as on our own, see evidences of the perfection of the Maker. And these evidences would probably be furnished in specific types all unknown to earth.</p>
				<p>A benevolent God has implanted in our nature no desires that may not and will not, in the appropriate time, have their gratification. He who made us with longings after knowledge, and the knowledge of all things, will gratify those longings. When we look out upon the stars of heaven, and ask ourselves, How has God wrought there, what the methods of his skill? we cannot doubt that we shall one day see and know.</p>
				<p>Death will doubtless invest us with such new powers of perception and investigation, that this world will be to us “new heavens and a new earth;” and new and many will be the lessons we shall take, and long the study of things here. This will be true of the physical natures and relations, and still more of the moral interests that are here. Christ and the glory of his kingdom will then “appear,” and be invested, to the intellect and the heart, with new interest⁠—in a length and breadth, and depth and height, which have not now “entered into the heart of man.”</p>
				<p>But this world, with all its past and future history, material and mental, will be but a point in comparison with all the works of God. And when earth and its realities shall have been learned and enjoyed in themselves and as exhibitions of God, so far from having exhausted and destroyed, it will but have developed in greater vigor the susceptibilities that have been addressed and blessed. And to know and enjoy God and his works elsewhere and without a limit, will be a want of the expanded and growing spirit, not to gratify which, would be starvation and death. It will be gratified. And heaven, that begins on earth, will spread itself out over the Universe of God. “Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty.” “Show us thy Glory.” Thou wilt make <em>all</em> thy goodness to pass before us, and proclaim to us in every method of utterance the name and glory of Jehovah.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
