<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Judgment</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The word “judgment” has no such definiteness of import in the Bible, as in the language of modern jurisprudence. The Hebrew words rendered <em>to judge</em> (<span xml:lang="he">דִּין</span> and <span xml:lang="he">שָׁפַט</span>) signify also to govern, to rule, to exercise authority. Under the former word Gesenius, in his lexicon, remarks, that “the ideas of ruling and judging are closely allied, not only in Oriental practice and polity, but also in their language.” The departments of government in our day, so distinct, as legislative, judicial, and executive, were unknown in the days of the Bible. The king made law, judged of the violation of it, and inflicted the penalty. The early chief magistrates of the Hebrews were called “judges,” which was equivalent to rulers. The prerogatives of the judge were essentially those of the king at a subsequent period.</p>
			<p>The following texts are instances in which God is said to judge the world in the large sense of administering a righteous government.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 67:4. “O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 96:10⁠–⁠13. “Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: the world also shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously. (11) Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof. (12) Let the field be joyful and all that is therein: then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice (13) Before the Lord; for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 98:8, 9. “Let the hills be joyful together (9) Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The following texts are prophetic, and refer to the Messiah and his kingdom.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Ps.</abbr> 72:1⁠–⁠8. “Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king’s son. (2) He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. (3) The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness. (4) He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor. (5) They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations. (6) He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth. (7) In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth. (8) He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Isa.</abbr> 2:4. “And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Isa.</abbr> 51:4, 5. “Hearken unto me, my people: and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest for a light of the people. (5) My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:22. “Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the Most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom.” See <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 20:4.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Micah 4:3. “And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into ploughshares,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>In the New Testament the words rendered <em>judgment</em> and <em>to judge</em> (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσις, κρίμα, κρίνω</i>), though somewhat more definite, are yet used with latitude. In keeping with the state of society at the time, there is less of the legislative idea; but the judicial and executive are blended. As in the following texts:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>John 5:30. “I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>John 18:31. “Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Acts 23:3, 6. “Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge me after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?” (6) “Of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question” (<i xml:lang="el">κρίνομαι</i>, <em>judged</em>).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Acts 24:6. “Whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Acts 25:9. “Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me?”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 5:12. “What have I to do to judge them also that are without? Do not ye judge them that are within?” See <abbr>chap.</abbr> 6:1⁠–⁠7.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The idea of punishment is often primary in “judgment.”</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Matt.</abbr> 23:33. “Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσεως</i>, <em>judgment</em>) of hell?”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Mark 3:29. “He that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation” (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσεως</i>, <em>judgment</em>).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p>John 5:29. “And shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation” (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσεως</i>, <em>judgment</em>).</p>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote>
				<p><abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:27. “A certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When, then, <strong>judgment</strong> is attributed to Christ as among the functions of Messiahship, nothing more may be meant than that he is <em>invested with and exercises authority</em>. And <strong>he begins the work of judgment when he receives the kingdom</strong>. The following texts are in point.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p>Matthew 16:27, 28</p>
				</header>
				<p>“For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works. (28) Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>These verses, as bearing on the Coming of the Son of Man, have been considered in the first Chapter. In them are two facts stated with perfect distinctness. First, The Son of Man was then just about (<i xml:lang="el">μέλλει</i>) to come in the glory of his Father and with his angels. This language, as we have before said, is evidently derived from <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:13, 14, and is explained in the following verse to mean “coming in his kingdom;” in other words, entering upon the administration of the Christian dispensation⁠—being invested with “dominion and glory and a kingdom.”</p>
			<p>But secondly, such administration implies the exercise of the judicial and executive functions. He will reward every man according to his works. And he is to do this <strong>then</strong>, that is, when he shall have been inducted into office. And as if to make certainty doubly sure, and to give definiteness to the hopes of his disciples, he tells them this shall come to pass before some of those present die. Theirs should be the personal privilege to see all this.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p>John 5:22, 23, 27</p>
				</header>
				<p>“For the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son: (23) That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father which hath sent him.” (27) “And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Here judgment (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσιν</i>) means the governmental prerogative (<abbr>v.</abbr> 23), and “to execute judgment” (<i xml:lang="el">κρίσιν ποιεῖν</i>) signifies to exercise the governmental and especially the judicial function. This is evident from <abbr>vs.</abbr> 28, 29, which refer to the final decision. True he had not at this time definitively taken upon himself the “dominion.” But he was soon to do so. The hour was coming, when greater works and higher prerogatives would be his. See <abbr>vs.</abbr> 20, 25, 28. The allusion here is like that in the Saviour’s reply to the high-priest, <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 26:63,64; and to Nathanael, John 1:49⁠–⁠51. He was not now “the Son of God in power,” but was soon to be so. These verses and the context are considered more at length in the Chapter on the Resurrection.</p>
			<section id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>Matthew 25</p>
				</header>
				<p>Verses 31⁠–⁠45. “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him,” which we have shown to be his investiture with the universal dominion of the Messiah, <em>then</em> shall he <em>sit upon his throne</em> and <em>adjudicate</em>. He will separate the good from the bad, pass verdict upon them severally, and reward and punish from that time onward. “Judgment” will be his (John 5:22).</p>
				<p>Verses 1⁠–⁠13. Here the <em>judicial decision</em> is represented as taking place <em>when</em> the Bridegroom comes, which, as we have seen, is at death.</p>
				<p>Verses 14⁠–⁠30. When the lord of the servants cometh, he then reckons and awards, that is <em>judges</em>. He comes at death.</p>
			</section>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Acts 10:42, 43</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Καὶ παρήγγειλεν ἡμῖν κηρύξαι τῷ λαῷ, καὶ διαμαρτύρασθαι, ὅτι οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ὡρισμένος ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ κριτὴς ζώντων καὶ νεκρῶν. (43) Τούτῳ πάντες οἱ προφῆται μαρτυροῦσιν, ἄφεσιν ἁμαρτιῶν λαβεῖν διὰ τοῦ ὀνόματος αὐτοῦ πάντα τὸν πιστεύοντα εἰς αὐτόν.</td>
						<td>And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. (48) To him give all the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>To him give all the prophets witness, that every man who believes in him, <em>has received</em> (2 Aorist) forgiveness through his name.</p>
			<p>Here Jesus is definitively constituted (<i xml:lang="el">ὡρισμένος</i>) Judge of the <em>living</em> as well as the dead, and penitent men <em>have received</em> forgiveness. From whom? The Judge to whom they are amenable, of course. Jesus, then, is continually in the exercise of the functions of Judge or King. Every true Christian <em>has been</em> forgiven. See John 1:12. To as many as received him he gave the right to be the sons of God (<i xml:lang="el">ἔδωκεν ἐξουσίαν</i>, Aorist, implying that the act was now complete and belonged to the past⁠—he <em>has given</em>). John 3:36. He that believeth on the Son <em>has</em> (<i xml:lang="el">ἔχει</i>, Present) everlasting life. And the “judgment” is one from which there is no appeal, John 5:24. He <em>hath</em> everlasting life, and <em>comes not</em> (<i xml:lang="el">ἔρχεται</i>) into condemnation, but <em>has passed</em> (<i xml:lang="el">μεταβέβηκεν</i>) from death unto life.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Acts 17:31</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>Ἔστησεν ἡμέραν, ἐν ᾗ μέλλει κρίνειν τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐν δικαιοσύνῃ, ἐν ἀνδρὶ ᾧ ὥρισεν, πίστιν παρασχὼν πᾶσιν ἀναστήσας αὐτὸν ἐκ νεκρῶν.</td>
						<td>He hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>God has instituted a tribunal (<i xml:lang="el">ἡμέραν</i> as in 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 4:3 <i xml:lang="el">ἀνθρωπίνης ἡμέρας</i> <em>a human tribunal</em>) at which he is now ready (<i xml:lang="el">μέλλει</i>) to judge the world in righteousness by a Man whom he has definitively constituted (<i xml:lang="el">ὥρισε</i>, the same verb as in <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4 <i xml:lang="el">τοῦ ὁρισθέντος υἱοῦ θεοῦ ἐν δυνάμει</i>, <em>definitively constituted Son of God in power</em>, as also Acts 10:42) and of whom, as thus ordained, he has given evidence demanding belief of all men in having raised him from the dead.</p>
			<p>The verb <i xml:lang="el">ἔστησεν</i> from <i xml:lang="el">ίστημι</i> does not signify <em>appoint with reference to the future</em>, but <em>establish at the present</em>. A reference to the use of this word in the Scriptures will make this apparent. See <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 26:15. Acts 1:23; 7:60. <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 3:31; 10:3. Heb 10:9. <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 18:16. John 15:16. The text, then, does not assert that God has “appointed” a future day when he will judge the world, but that he has <em>constituted</em> or established a court at which he is <em>now</em> ready to judge the world by Jesus Christ⁠—“all nations” (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 25:32). And this is given as a reason <abbr>v.</abbr> 30 why God now commandeth all men everywhere to repent. He has “anointed the Most Holy,” <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 9:24, and now whosoever believeth in him has received (<i xml:lang="el">λαβεῖν</i>) remission of sins. Acts 10:43.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">John 12:31</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Νῦν κρίσις ἐστὶ τοῦ κόσμου.</td>
						<td>Now is the judgment of this world.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Christ had just before said, <abbr>v.</abbr> 23, “The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified.”</p>
			<p>He was now about to become the Son of God. A voice from heaven reaffirmed this fact. The Saviour then says, “Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.” These remarks define and give intensity to the “<em>now</em>” of the text. The judgment of this world <em>began when</em> Jesus was glorified. He then entered upon the administration of the Messianic Dispensation⁠—the work of casting out Satan from the dominion of this world and of drawing all men unto himself.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2"><abbr>Rev.</abbr> 22:12.</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Ἰδοὺ ἔρχομαι ταχύ, καὶ ὁ μισθός μου μετ᾽ ἐμοῦ, ἀποδοῦναι ἑκάστῳ ὡς τὸ ἔργον αὐτοῦ ἐσται.</td>
						<td>And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Behold, I come quickly, and my award is with me to award to each man as his work shall be.</p>
			<p>These words have been considered in <abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> as showing that the Coming of the Lord referred to the change at death. But they show that “judgment” is also one of the great facts of that crisis. This text was designed at once to comfort Christians and also to admonish the wicked⁠—at any rate to remind the faithful that God would vindicate his authority. The unjust (<abbr>v.</abbr> 11) would for the present have power, and act out his injustice; let him do so, and let those of low depravity act out their vulgar wickedness. Still let the just and the holy maintain their integrity. And as a motive aiding them in this difficult duty, he repeats the assurance of <abbr>v.</abbr> 7 that he shall soon come and take them to himself⁠—come and award to the Christian and to the persecutor according to his character. In this language, the Saviour does most emphatically attribute to himself the judicial function. And <em>the men then living</em> were “quickly” to experience his power, judicial and executive, for good or for evil.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">1 Peter 4:5</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Οἳ ἀποδώσουσι λόγον τῷ ἑτοίμως ἔχοντι κρῖναι ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς.</td>
						<td>Who shall give account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Who shall give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.</p>
			<p>None will deny that this language has reference to Christ. And certainly it ascribes to him judicial power; and with equal certainty asserts that at the time then present, he was authorized to and should use it⁠—<i xml:lang="el">ἑτοίμως ἔχοντι κρῖναι</i>, <em>being in a state of readiness, qualified for the present exercise of “judgment</em>.”</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">2 Peter 2:3</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Οἷς τὸ κρίμα ἔκπαλαι οὐκ ἀργεῖ καὶ ἡ ἀπώλεια αὐτῶν οὐ νυστάζει.</td>
						<td>Whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>For whom the judgment of olden times (referred to in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 4⁠–⁠8) lingereth not, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>The Apostle was speaking of the false teachers that were troubling the church, as false prophets had done of old. And adds, that the punishments of former times would not be slow to come upon these errorists. He gives instances of the manner in which of old God had dealt with sinners, <abbr>v.</abbr> 4 <abbr class="eoc">seq.</abbr> The Lord knows how to deal with these offenders also. He will keep them in suffering for a day of punishment. The punishment here referred to is that of the future world, <abbr>v.</abbr> 12. But that <em>hastened and was near</em>, <abbr>v.</abbr> 3. And it was to be inflicted by the Lord Jesus Christ (<i xml:lang="el">κύριος</i>).</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Matthew 12:36</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Λέγω δὲ ὑμῖν, ὅτι πᾶν ῥῆμα ἀργὸν, ὃ λαλήσουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι, ἀποδώσουσι περὶ αὐτοῦ λόγον ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως.</td>
						<td>But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>In <em>a</em> day of judgment. This contemplates men as going individually each to his “day of judgment.” Every man will have “a day of judgment”⁠—every man in his own order, 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:23.</p>
			<p>So also <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 2:16. They who have sinned with the knowledge of the law, shall be judged by the law (<abbr>v.</abbr> 12) in a day (<i xml:lang="el">ἐν ἡμέρᾳ</i>) when God judges the secrets of men, according to my Gospel, by Jesus Christ. All instances of this kind point to the fact that each man has his personal day of account with Jesus Christ.</p>
			<p>The reader is referred to that numerous class of texts adduced in the preceding Chapter, to show that the Judgment and Heaven and Hell as beginning, are synchronical with death.</p>
			<p>The following texts are especially relied upon as proving the doctrine of a future day of general Judgment at the end of the world.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">2 Peter 2:4, 9</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Ὁ θεὸς ἀγγέλων ἁμαρτησάντων οὐκ ἐφείσατο, ἀλλὰ σειροῖς ζόφου ταρταρώσας παρέδωκεν εἰς κρίσιν τηρουμένους.</td>
						<td>God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Οἶδε κύριος εὐσεβεῖς ἐκ πειρασμοῦ ῥύεσθαι, ἀδίκους δὲ εἰς ἡμέραν κρίσεως κολαζομένους τηρεῖν.</td>
						<td>The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>Verse 4. God spared not the angels that sinned, but, inflicting upon them while in chains of darkness, the torments of hell, gave them over confined, unto (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>, <em>so as that they should experience</em>) judicial punishment.</p>
			<p>We have shown that <i xml:lang="el">κρίσις</i> often signifies punishment. See <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 23:33. Mark 3:9. John 5:29. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:27.</p>
			<p>Verse 9. The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, but to keep the unjust tormented for (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>, <em>so that they should experience</em>) a day (period) of punishment.</p>
			<p>The participle (<i xml:lang="el">κολαζομένους</i>) has its corresponding noun (<i xml:lang="el">κόλασιν</i>) in the phrase “everlasting punishment,” <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 25:46, and is in the present tense. So in <abbr>v.</abbr> 4, the participle (<i xml:lang="el">ταρταρώσας</i>) denotes, if any word in the Greek language can do so, the punishment of the future world. See Liddell and Scott on <i xml:lang="el">τάρταρος</i>.</p>
			<p>Nothing can be plainer than that these verbs indicate the present sufferings of punishment, rather than confinement with reference to a future period of judgment and infliction. There are no stronger terms in the Bible to denote the torments of hell, than those employed in these verses. And they indicate present experience.</p>
			<p>Besides, the connection requires this. God punished the angels that sinned; he punished the antediluvians and preserved Noah; he punished the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah and delivered Lot (the last two are certainly instances of actual punishment); he will punish these false teachers and deliver you. They shall “utterly perish in their own corruption,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 12.</p>
			<p>The word rendered “<em>to be</em> reserved” (<i xml:lang="el">τηρουμένους</i>) <abbr>v.</abbr> 4, and that in <abbr>v.</abbr> 9 rendered “<em>to be</em> punished” (<i xml:lang="el">κολαζομένους</i>) are both present participles, and should be rendered <em>confined</em> and <em>tormented</em>. The idea is that they were made the subjects of the infliction of Tartarus, which in Grecian mythology was the place of future punishment.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Jude 6</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Ἀγγέλους τε τοὺς μὴ τηρήσαντας τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἀρχὴν, ἀλλὰ ἀπολιπόντας τὸ ἴδιον οἰκητήριον, εἰς κρίσιν μεγάλης ἡμέρας, δεσμοῖς ἀϊδίοις ὑπὸ ζόφον τετήρηκεν.</td>
						<td>The angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>“Hath reserved,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He hath confined with everlasting chains in darkness for (<i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i>) the punishment of <em>a</em> great day. The angels had had their “great day” of judgment, and had been doomed to their painful experience⁠—the blackness of darkness forever. For the use of <i xml:lang="el">εἰς</i> in this sense, see Robinson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lexicon</i> <i xml:lang="el">Εἰς</i> 3. <abbr class="eoc">d.</abbr></p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">2 Timothy 4:1, 2</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Διαμαρτύρομαι οὖν ἐγώ ἐνώπιον τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ τοῦ κυρίου χριστοῦ Ἰησοῦ Χριστου τοῦ μέλλοντος κρίνειν ζῶντας καὶ νεκρούς κατὰ τὴν ἐπιφάνειαν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν βασιλείαν αὐτοῦ. (2) κήρυξον τὸν λόγον.</td>
						<td>I charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom; (2) Preach the word, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>For <i xml:lang="el">νεκρούς κατὰ τὴν</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, some manuscripts of good authority read <i xml:lang="el">νεκρούς, καὶ τὴν</i>. It will then read</p>
			<p>“I solemnly declare to you, before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who is about to judge the living and the dead, his appearing and his kingdom. Preach the word,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>Of the appearing and the kingdom in its glory of Jesus Christ, we have spoken in a former Chapter. An appeal to it as a motive was common with the Apostles. Paul here solemnly affirms the great fact, and in view of it would have Timothy preach the Gospel; be instant in season, out of season. Observe Christ is <em>about</em> to judge (<i xml:lang="el">μέλλοντος</i>).</p>
			<p>In favor of the above reading, it should be observed that the common version implies a use of the verb (<i xml:lang="el">διαμαρτύρομαι</i>) and a construction altogether peculiar; while our rendering in its transitive force is common. See Acts 28:23. “Testified the kingdom of God.” Also Acts 18:5; 20:20; 23:11.</p>
			<p>As preliminary to the consideration of <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 11:20⁠–⁠24, and 12:41, 42, it may be remarked, that the phrase “a day of judgment” in the times of the New Testament and those preceding, seems to have taken the place of, or to have been used with the same significance as the Old Testament phrase “a day of the Lord,” that is, a day of temporal calamity upon cities or communities (<abbr>Isa.</abbr> 2:12; 13:6, 9; 34:6. Joel 1:15; 3:14). As evidence of this change, see Judith 16:17, where “<em>a</em> day of judgment” (the article is wanting) refers to the destruction of Holofernes and the rout of his army. Also Esther (<abbr>Apoc.</abbr>) 10:12, where “day of judgment” has reference to the triumphs of Mordecai and the Jews and the slaughter of their enemies. There is in these cases no reference to a future world.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Matthew 11:20⁠–⁠24</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">(20) Τότε ἤρξατο ὀνειδίζειν τὰς πόλεις ἐν αἷς ἐγένοντο αἱ πλεῖσται δυνάμεις αὐτοῦ, ὅτι οὐ μετενόησαν. (21) Οὐαί σοι, Χοραζείν, οὐαί σοι, Βηθσαϊδά, ὅτι εἰ ἐν Τύρῳ καὶ Σιδῶνι ἐγένοντο αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ γενόμεναι ἐν ὑμῖν, πάλαι ἂν ἐν σάκκῳ καὶ σποδῷ μετενόησαν. (22) πλὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, Τύρῳ καὶ Σιδῶνι ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως ἢ ὑμῖν. (23) Καὶ σὺ, Καπερναούμ, ἡ ἕως τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ὑψωθεῖσα, ἕως ἅδου καταβιβασθήσῃ, ὅτι εἰ ἐν Σοδόμοις ἐγένοντο αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ γενόμεναι ἐν σοί, ἔμεινεν ἂν μέχρι τῆς σήμερον. (24) πλὴν λέγω ὑμῖν, ὅτι γῇ Σοδόμων ἀνεκτότερον ἔσται ἐν ἡμέρᾳ κρίσεως, ἢ σοί.</td>
						<td>Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not. (21) Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. (22) But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you. (23) And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. (24) But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for thee.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>“Long ago,” <abbr>v.</abbr> 21. <em>Formerly</em>, that is, in their day.</p>
			<p>In both instances of the phrase “day of judgment” it will be noticed that the article is wanting. It shall be more tolerable⁠ ⁠… in <em>a</em> day of judgment.</p>
			<p>Tyre and Sidon had had in repeated instances a day of judgment, and were destined to experience others. But none of them had been or would be so terrible as that “day of judgment” which was to come upon these cities of the Jews, who rejected their own Messiah. So of Sodom: when the judgments of God should come upon the Jews, and they could be compared with what befell the inhabitants of the cities of the plain, it would be seen that the former were more awful than the latter.</p>
			<p>This interpretation is confirmed by the manner in which Luke relates this language of the Saviour.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Luke 10:8⁠–⁠16. “And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: (9) And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. (10) But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, (11) Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you: notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. (12) But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. (13) Woe unto thee Chorazin! woe unto thee Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes. (14) But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you. (15) And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to hell. (16) He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>From this we learn that <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 11:20⁠–⁠24 above, was uttered immediately after the instructions that Christ gave to the Seventy. They were to go to the cities in their course, and say to them, “The Kingdom of God has come near to you.” If the inhabitants received the message, well; but if not, they were to shake off the dust from their feet, and leave them⁠—saying, however, as they went, “The Kingdom of God has come near.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> When the messengers went to a city with the message of the Saviour, the kingdom had come near to <em>them</em> indeed. And when they rejected the message, it was still true that the kingdom was at hand. And if it might not bring to <em>them</em> its blessings, it would still be near and bring blessings to others; but it would bring to them fearful judgments. If it might not bring good, it would bring evil. The disciples of Christ understood well this allusion to the fact that the overthrow of the Jews was to come in connection with the introduction of the Messianic dispensation. The Saviour adds, The doom of Sodom will, in that day⁠—the day to which he had alluded in <abbr>v.</abbr> 11⁠—be more tolerable, than the doom of that city. The sufierings of that city will be seen to be greater than the sufferings of Sodom.</p>
			<p>Verse 14. The doom of Tyre and Sidon will be more tolerable in <em>the</em> judgment (<i xml:lang="el">ἐν τῇ κρίσει</i>) than theirs.</p>
			<p>The language used to denote the time of these evils to the Jews, is to be noticed. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 11 it is significantly said that the Kingdom of God was near; with the advent of which the destruction of the Jews was an associate event. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 12 it is called “that day,” assuming that it was understood by the Seventy. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 14 it is called “<em>the</em> judgment,” that is, the well-known judgment before alluded to. A reference to the teachings of the Saviour will make it apparent that with this subject the disciples must be entirely familiar. The Coming of the Kingdom of Christ and the contemporaneous destruction of the Jews, “that day,” and “the judgment,” are placed in such connection as to show that they refer to contemporaneous events.</p>
			<p>It is objected to the preceding that it is represented as future: “It <em>shall</em> be more tolerable for Sodom,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, implying that Sodom was, in the future, to meet its judgment. There is less of this import in the Greek than in the translation. The adjective translated “more tolerable” (<i xml:lang="el">ἀνεκτότερον</i>) is neuter, and refers in general to the destruction of Sodom on the one hand, and that of these modern cities on the other. It may be understood to agree with some such word as sufferings or doom. Thus, The doom of Sodom, in that day, will be move tolerable than the doom of that city. The attention of course was fixed with intensity upon the future but hastening calamities of the Jews. The scene was in the future. A comparison of that scene with another of its kind was to be instituted. But the two facts must both exist before they can be compared. The Saviour therefore says, In the day when these painful calamities shall come upon this guilty city, the doom of Sodom will be a more tolerable doom, that is, this will be the feeling of the observer in the comparison of the two.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th colspan="2">Matthew 12:41, 42</th>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td xml:lang="el">Ἄνδρες Νινευεῖται ἀναστήσονται ἐν τῇ κρίσει μετὰ τῆς γενεᾶς ταύτης, καὶ κατακρινοῦσιν αὐτήν· ὅτι μετενόησαν εἰς τὸ κήρυγμα Ἰωνᾶ· καὶ ἰδοὺ, πλεῖον Ἰωνᾶ ὧδε. (42) Βασίλισσα νότου ἐγερθήσεται ἐν τῇ κρίσει μετὰ τῆς γενεᾶς ταύτης, καὶ κατακρινεῖ αὐτήν· ὅτι ἦλθεν ἐκ τῶν περάτων τῆς γῆς ἀκοῦσαι τὴν σοφίαν Σολομῶνος· καὶ ἰδοὺ, πλεῖον Σολομῶνος ὧδε.</td>
						<td>The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold, a greater than Jonas is here. (42) The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
			<p>The “judgment” is “with this generation.” It is a judgment that relates to them and is coming into their midst. This is the most natural construction. It is⁠—of commentators before us⁠—that of Erasmus, Doddridge, Rosenmueller, Kuinoel, Robinson.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> Also of the translators of the Bible. For a similar use of the preposition (<i xml:lang="el">μετὰ</i>, <em>with</em>), see 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 6:6, 7. <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 2:16; 11:7; 12:17; 13:7. 1 John 4:17. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 12:14. John 3:25. Luke 1:72; 10:37. There are indeed authorities for giving to this preposition the sense of “in the midst of,” and making it connect “shall rise” and “this generation.” But this is not the most natural rendering.</p>
			<p>The judgment, then, is not the general judgment but a particular judgment, and that relates to that generation;⁠—to it, not as composed of individuals, each of whom should meet his own judgment, in his individual capacity, but to the generation <em>as such</em>, to the community or nation considered as a unit. See <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 23:34⁠–⁠38. “All the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel⁠ ⁠… shall come upon this generation.”</p>
			<p>This generation was wicked beyond a precedent. Nineveh repented with only the preaching of Jonas. Sodom would have repented with the means then employed upon the Jews, and been standing at that day. The Queen of the South, from only a distant report of Solomon and his religion, came from the uttermost parts of the earth to see that of which she had heard. But these Jews with their own Messiah in their midst, uttering the truths of the Kingdom of God, from his own lips divine, and giving attestation of his Messiahship by miracles multitudinous and such in kind as the world had never seen, was “despised and rejected,” and would soon be put to death. In the scenic style of the day, the Saviour says, that when shall come “the judgment with this generation,” the men of Nineveh will rise from the dead (<i xml:lang="el">ἀναστήσονται</i>, the same word as in 1 <abbr>Thess.</abbr> 4:17), and the Queen of the South will also come up from her grave (<i xml:lang="el">ἐγερθήσεται</i>, the same verb as in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 27:52 and 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:52), and they will appear as witnesses against this generation⁠—the rejectors of the Messiah. Of course this is not to be understood literally.</p>
			<p>That the “day of judgment” in these cases has reference to the infliction of temporal evils is evident.</p>
			<p>1. It is the judgment of <em>a generation</em>, and of <em>a city</em>. Generations and cities as such, do not go to the judgment of a future world. And the hypothesis that the judgment here spoken of is that of the future world, would imply that we are to consider the individuals of these places and this time, as going to judgment to give up their personal and individual accounts and receive their doom one by one. And we shall have a very great variety of character, and a corresponding variety of punishment, both in the ancient cities and in the then existing cities. And to institute a comparison between cities and communities <em>thus</em> judged and punished, the <em>average</em> of character and doom must be that on which such comparison can be instituted. But is this, can this be what the language under consideration means?</p>
			<p>2. The evils threatened are temporal evils. In the case of the cities named this is evident from the fact that the comparison of their doom is with temporal evils. Sodom would have repented and “remained to this day;” but was destroyed by fire. Tyre and Sidon had before had days of judgment, and were to experience other and more terrible, especially the former city, which has been utterly destroyed. Capernaum had been elevated to heaven, but was to be thrust down to hell⁠—temporal the prosperity, so also the ruin.</p>
			<p>That the same is true of the “judgment with this generation” is obvious from the connection. It is immediately added (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 12:43⁠–⁠45), “When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. (44) Then he saith, I will return unto my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. (45) Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and <em>the last state</em> of that man is worse than the first. <em>Even so shall it be also unto this wicked generation.</em>” It⁠—<em>the generation</em>⁠—is ripe for destruction. From Luke (11:37⁠–⁠51) we learn that the Saviour went on to say immediately after, and while dining with a Pharisee, those fearful things which close with the announcement that the blood of all the prophets is to be required of this generation; which means (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 23:35⁠–⁠38) that their house should be left unto them desolate. Their Temple would be destroyed and its worship cease; their city razed to the ground.</p>
			<p>3. It is in keeping with much that the Saviour has elsewhere said. See <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 3:9⁠–⁠12; 13:24⁠–⁠30, 36⁠–⁠43, 47⁠–⁠51; 21:33⁠–⁠45; 22:1⁠–⁠10. Mark 12:1⁠–⁠12. Luke 19:11⁠–⁠27; 20:9⁠–⁠18. And it was taught “without a parable,” <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 23:34⁠–⁠39; 24:1 <abbr>seq.</abbr> Luke 19:41⁠–⁠44; 21:5⁠–⁠36. Nothing was more prominent on the face of Christ’s teaching than that Jerusalem was to be destroyed. The axe stood at the root of the tree; the fan was in the hand; expurgation and destruction were near. The tares and the wheat would grow together for a while, but the harvest would soon come, when the tares would be burned. And the harvest was the end of <em>this dispensation</em> (<i xml:lang="el">αἰῶνος τούτου</i>).</p>
			<p>4. And finally, what would the disciples understand by this language⁠—“a day of judgment,” “that day,” “the judgment?” It should be remembered that the rewards and punishments of the Mosaic Institute were exclusively temporal. Not an allusion is found, in the case either of individuals or communities in which reference is made to the good or evil of a future world as motive to obedience. The men addressed by the Saviour had been educated under that Institute, and were of course familiar with its facts and phraseology. And if, moreover, we take into account the various methods, referred to in the texts above quoted, by which the disciples had been taught to look for temporal destruction as soon to come upon their country; and yet more, that such destruction was distinctly predicted (<abbr>Dan.</abbr> 9:26; 12:1⁠—this last almost the very words which Jesus employs, <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:21), can we doubt how the disciples would understand this language? It would seem that nothing can be more certain than that the one and sole idea conveyed to their minds was that of the temporal destruction so soon to come upon the Jews.</p>
			<p>We come to the conclusion, then, that <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 10:15; 11:20⁠–⁠24; 12:41, 42. Luke 11:31,32, do not teach that there is a particular time when, in the future world, all the race will be assembled and judgment passed upon them.</p>
			<p>But if it be otherwise with any of our readers, and they must still claim “the judgment” to be that of the future world, and that at the time when these words were uttered, it was both to the inhabitants of the ancient cities and to those of the modern <em>yet future</em>; then for them we fall back upon such texts as the following:</p>
			<p>Acts 10:42. He commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he who was constituted by God judge of the living and the dead.</p>
			<p>Here we are informed that the jurisdiction of Christ is over both this and the unseen world⁠—including of course in the latter <em>the men of then past generations</em>.</p>
			<p>Acts 17:30, 31. The times of this ignorance God winked at; but now commands all men everywhere to repent, because he has established a court in which he is ready, through that Man whom he has definitively constituted to judge the world in righteousness.</p>
			<p>This may teach that, previous to the coming of Christ, God had not treated men who sinned as sinners were to be treated subsequently. They had “sinned without law,” and would “<em>perish</em> without law.” They had not been informed of a judgment after death, and would not meet it as we must meet it. But now a court had been organized, and a Judge appointed, and God has given the ground for faith in this great fact in that he raised him from the dead. What was the state of the ante-Messianic dead, and in what sense, if any, they were unjudged, we will not assume to say. But that Christ inaugurated in the unseen as really as in this world a New Dispensation, would seem to be revealed. And if the inhabitants, as individuals, of Sodom and Gomorrah, as well as those of Chorazin and Bethsaida, had at that time a judgment before Christ then future to meet, it was in accordance with the processes of succeeding dispensations. At any rate, in the day of Acts 17:31 God was ready and then about to judge all men; and from that time the court has been open and in process.</p>
			<p>That the New Dispensation, the Kingdom of Christ, is in part and in chief part in the unseen world, is evident from the fact that the Apostles ever represent the death of believers as being or implying “the appearing,” “the manifestation,” or unveiling of the glory of Christ and his kingdom. Here we see and know but in part.</p>
			<p>In point in this connection is John 12:31, “Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out.” There is “now” a judgment of this world, and of the prince of this world, that is peculiar to the Christian Dispensation. What this may imply of those who had lived before Christ, we seem not to have the means of definitely learning.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
