<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Chapter I</h2>
			<p>The Coming of hte Son of Man</p>
			<p>The language of the Saviour can be understood only as we know the circumstances in which it was uttered, and especially the character and opinions of the persons addressed. This is preeminently true of what he says of himself as “The Son of Man,” of his “kingdom,” and of his “coming in his kingdom.”</p>
			<p>Most modern commentators seem to suppose that the Jews, and especially the disciples of Christ, occupied the same stand-point as themselves, and that the language addressed to them on this subject, must mean what it would mean if addressed to the men of this day. As well might it be assumed that what should have been said in the days of the Messiah, of the earth, the starry heavens, the rising of the sun, meant what it would mean now. The Saviour meant to say and did say what he knew his honest hearers would understand him to say. He knew of course that the unbelieving Jews would not understand him. In them would be fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive. But his disciples understood him, or if they did not at first, they asked for explanations. Jesus took special pains to have them understand him. In one instance, after uttering several parables, and giving, of some of them, private explanations to his disciples, he says to them, “ Have ye understood all these things?” “ It is given <em>unto you</em> to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven” (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 13:11, 51). On another occasion, “I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and <em>hast revealed them unto babes</em>” (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 11:25). There may seem to be exceptions, but these will be found on examination rather to establish the rule. When Christ told his disciples that he was going up to Jerusalem, and should there be betrayed and delivered to the Gentiles to be crucified (Mark 9:31, 32), they did not understand him. Not but the words were of obvious meaning; but it was no part of their programme of the Messiah’s work. They knew not how to reconcile this with other supposed facts. And as the subject was so tender and so awful, they refrained from again introducing it and asking for explanations. But this only confirms the general rule that the disciples understood what Jesus said to them either at first, or after seeking explanations.</p>
			<p>Of course it is not denied that there was a length and breadth and depth and height of meaning in the words of the Saviour, the whole of which neither the disciples nor any other man in any age, could, while in this world, fully comprehend. What we claim is, that while their conceptions must be inadequate, the Saviour did not designedly leave them with erroneous impressions of the import of his language. What he said might imply more than they understood, and than he knew they would understand, but it was designed to imply <em>that</em>.</p>
			<p>The disciples were sometimes in error. But whenever they expressed that error, the Saviour corrected it. When, for instance, they were discussing the question who should be the greatest in the kingdom he was soon to establish, and with, as he very well knew, erroneous and secular views, he told them their error. In one case he took a child and set him in their midst, and told them, if they would be great in his kingdom they must be like little children (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 18:1⁠–⁠6). At another time he taught them that to acquire distinction and honor in his kingdom they must be servant of all, as he himself was⁠—rebuking thus their ambition and correcting their error.</p>
			<p>There were some truths which the Saviour did not at that time reveal. “While, for instance, he knew that they were looking to his kingdom in its temporal aspects, almost exclusively, if not quite so, he did not in that particular correct them. The time had not yet come for life and immortality to be brought to light. That belonged to the illumination of the Christian Dispensation. While in this particular their opinions embraced but a part of the truth, it was yet truth and not error. There was in fact to be an exalted felicity and unfading honor connected with their relations, in this world, to the kingdom of the Messiah.</p>
			<p>If this be not so⁠—if, when the Saviour spoke of coming in his glory and rewarding them for their fidelity, he had reference only to the future world, while yet they understood him to refer to what was temporal, did he not of purpose deceive them? Did he not, again and again, amid the discouragements connected with discipleship to him in his state of humility, hold out*to them encouragements which, as understood by them, and known of course to him as so understood, had no foundation in fact? What I know a man understands by what I say to him, that I do say to him.</p>
			<p>“The Kingdom”</p>
			<p>What⁠—let it be distinctly propounded⁠—did the disciples understand by “the kingdom” which the Messiah was to administer? (We say <em>administer</em>; for <em>reign</em> or <em>administration</em>, rather than “kingdom,” is in most cases the proper rendering of <i xml:lang="el">βασιλεία</i>.) Were their ideas of it chiefly as of this world, or of the future? Unquestionably the former. That after the illumination subsequent to the glorification of Christ, they saw that kingdom in its higher glory in a future world, we know. But we are considering them as attending upon the man Christ Jesus in the days of his humiliation, and are seeking for the import of language as addressed to them at that time.</p>
			<p>These disciples were Jews. Their education, so far as they had received any, was Jewish. Their religious opinions and impressions were from the Old Testament⁠—as interpreted at that time.</p>
			<p>It was no part of the design of the Old Testament to teach a future state. It taught it only by indirection, and then very obscurely. The Hebrews were on this subject behind the more intelligent nations of heathendom, their cotemporaries. And so far as they had any notions of a hereafter, they seem to have derived them from these nations. In the earliest and almost the only allusion to a future state as one of rewards and punishments, found in the Old Testament, it is spoken of as taught by travellers, and as the belief of foreign lands. “ Have ye not asked them that go by the way [travellers]? and do ye not know their tokens [testimony], that the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction?” (Job 21:29, 30.) The writings of the Greeks and Romans and also of the Eastern nations furnish very much more on this subject than do the Old Testament Scriptures. A marked effect of the captivity was the development of this idea. Not that the inspired writings of a subsequent dae present it; but it is found in other Jewish literature. (See 2 <abbr>Macc.</abbr> 7.)</p>
			<p>If we refer to the Mosaic Institute we shall find that its motives are drawn not from the future, but the present world. The rewards of fidelity and the penalties for disobedience were of time and earth.</p>
			<p>And when we come to the time of the Saviour we find the fact of the future state <em>an open question</em>. The Pharisees asserted it: the Sadducees⁠—the more educated and refined part of the community, denied it. And by this denial they did not lose caste as “orthodox.” They, in common with the Pharisees, were members of the Sanhedrim. The philosophical habits of the Alexandrian Jews seem not to have taken the direction of this question. They were the advocates and the exemplifiers, some of them, of a spiritual religion, in the Platonic sense⁠—a religion that had direct connection with God, in the absence of form and ceremony. But it was a present religion. So far as we are able to learn, it looked not beyond the grave. It contemplated man as he now is.</p>
			<p>The prophetic representations of the reign of the Messiah would lead the unspiritual to understand it as of this world.</p>
			<p>The fact of the Messianic reign is more distinctly brought to view in Daniel than in any other of the prophets. . But what is this presentation? Turn we to <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Here are symbolized the Babylonian, the Medo-Persian, and the Grecian: kingdoms, with that, so complex, of the successors of Alexander. In succession to these “the God of heaven sets up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever.” Here we notice that the reign of the Messiah is indicated by the same terms as are these secular governments, and the same qualities and functions are attributed to it.. It is not to be left to other people. It breaks and consumes all other kingdoms. Not a word to indicate its spiritual character.</p>
			<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. is “an advance upon <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. Still the whole description is temporal and secular. One like “a son of man” appears, and under the especial divine patronage stands at the head of power. “ There is given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.” “And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High.”</p>
			<p>There is indeed in <abbr>chap.</abbr> 12:1⁠–⁠3 an allusion to what is more spiritual. In that “time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation”⁠—the same as that to which the Saviour refers <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:21, and which implied the end of the Jewish civil and ecclesiastical polity⁠—there would be saved all the truly spiritual, and they, with that Gentile “dust” that should be roused to life, would constitute a new organization⁠—save the drawback of those to whom the gospel should prove a savor of death unto death. The good would shine as the brightness of the firmament, and turning many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever. But this language, exceedingly obscure till after the events had transpired, would be unintelligible toa Jew. Yet with this exception all the descriptions of Daniel are such as a Jew⁠—such Jews as were most of the nation in the days of the Saviour⁠—would understand as applying to a temporal kingdom.</p>
			<p>And if we refer to other cotemporary and earlier Prophets, we shall find the same temporal and especially Jewish imagery employed. Ezekiel sees a new city⁠—a new Jerusalem and Temple, and the most ample accommodations for the ceremonies of the Mosaic Institute; and the Holy Land apportioned off anew for the several tribes, all of which were to be restored to their integrity and distinct locality. Here was:Judaism glorified.</p>
			<p>Isaiah is presented with scenes of prosperity and of surpassing glory to the friends of God. Eye had not seen, nor ear heard, neither had entered into the heart of man, the things that God had prepared for them that love him. There should be a new heaven and a new earth. The sun should no more go down nor the moon withdraw her shining. But this was all to be Jewish prosperity. All nations were to come up to Jerusalem with their gold and their silver as offerings to the God of Israel. The flocks of Kedar and the rams of Nebaioth should minister to the Temple service.</p>
			<p>As a matter of fact this language of the prophets was, in the time of Christ, understood to imply that there was-to be raised up a mighty prince who should rule over the Jews in power and splendor, and who should lead them on, not only to the attainment of their liberty from the yoke of oppression, but to the conquest of the nations. And it was to posts of honor in such a kingdom and under such a prince, that the disciples aspired. It was with reference to such positions of distinction that they repeatedly disputed among themselves who should be greatest⁠—and that, almost up to the very hour of the crucifixion (Luke 22:24⁠–⁠30). Maternal aspirations operated in this direction: “Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom.” It was this secular and unsanctified anticipation that led Peter⁠—when Christ told the disciples that he must go up to Jerusalem and there be rejected by the chief priests and scribes, and be crucified⁠—in startling forgetfulness of himself and of propriety, to rebuke (!) his Master⁠—though we may hope that love for that Master had some place with ambition in his heart. It was this hope of national deliverance that led the multitudes when Jesus was entering Jerusalem, to spread their garments and branches of trees in the way, and cry Hosanna to the Son of David⁠—the very multitude that in a few brief hours, and when their selfish hopes were disappointed, cried, Crucify him! Crucify him!</p>
			<p>That the oft repeated instructions of the Saviour in relation to the nature of his kingdom, could not have failed to produce a deep impression on the minds of the disciples, we believe. They doubtless felt that there was that in the subject which they but imperfectly understood, and which it was the pleasure of their Master not then to explain more perfectly. He told them there were many things which they could not then bear, and which would be explained at a future time.</p>
			<p>If the view we have taken of what were the theories of the disciples be correct, it must modify very materially our interpretation of no inconsiderable portion of the Gospel. It has seemed to the writer that most modern commentators have perpetrated a very flagrant anachronism, in assuming that the disciples, when attending upon Christ in the days of his flesh, had substantially the same views, as had those same disciples after the day of Pentecost and the gift of the Spirit.</p>
			<p>These remarks premised, we proceed to the more direct and scriptural consideration of the subject of this chapter⁠—“The Coming of the Son of Man,” <i xml:lang="el">παρουσία τοῦ γἱοῦ τοῦ ἀνθρώπων</i>.</p>
			<p>“The Coming of the Son of Man” is to be distinguished from “The Coming of the Lord.” This latter will be considered in the following Chapter.</p>
			<p>Son of Man</p>
			<p>With one exception, the phrase “The Son of Man” is used in the New Testament only by the evangelists, and by them always as from the lips of the Saviour himself. It denotes ordinarily the <em>Man Christ Jesus</em>, and when not, <em>the Messiah as engaged in introducing his kingdom to the world, rather than as presiding in it</em>. The Saviour was glorified and definitively constituted the Son of God in power and authority at his resurrection. <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4. Acts 2:33, 36; 5:31. <abbr>Phil.</abbr> 2:9. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 10:12. Still, his kingdom as embracing the only religion from heaven, was not completely constituted. The Jewish Religion, as embodied in the Mosaic Institute, was in the world, and by divine authority ;⁠—an authority not yet revoked in form. And it was not till the providence of God, by the annihilation of the Jewish polity, civil and ecclesiastical, had put an end to that Institute, that Christianity stood the sole religion by divine appointment. Then the kingdom of Christ had fully come. The Saviour indeed remarked, on one occasion, that the Law and the Prophets were until John; but by that did not design to say that the ceremonies of the Old Testament were abrogated, for himself observed them (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 26:18), but only that with John began the dawning of the day of the Messiah’s kingdom.</p>
			<p>“The Coming”</p>
			<p>“The Coming of the Son of Man” is to be interpreted with the same latitude, and <em>applies to the work of the Messiah from the time of his resurrection to the overthrow of the Jewish power</em>. Not till then⁠—when the seventh angel had sounded⁠—were there great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. Then the <em>transition period</em> closed. As instances of the use of this phrase as referring to the time of his resurrection, see <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 10:23. Luke 22:69. “ Hereafter (<i xml:lang="el">ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν</i>, <em>from now</em>) shall the Son of Man sit on the right hand of the power of God.” The parallel text in Mark (14:62) is, “Ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” So in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 26:64. See also <abbr>Eph.</abbr> 1:20⁠–⁠22; <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4. <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 1:3. As instances of the use of the language in application to Christ down to the time of the destruction of Jerusalem and the complete introduction of the Christian Dispensation, see <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:30, 37⁠–⁠39. Mark 13:24⁠–⁠26. Luke 21:20⁠–⁠27.</p>
			<p>Scripture Argument</p>
			<p>The language of the New Testament concerning the Coming of the Son of Man will be understood only as the following extract from the captive Prophet is rightly interpreted. We have briefly alluded to it on a previous page.</p>
			<p>Daniel 7:9⁠–⁠14.</p>
			<p>“I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. (10) A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened. (11) I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame. (12) As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time. (13) I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. (14) And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.”</p>
			<p>It is unnecessary here to go into an extended examination of the prophetic significance of this language. The views of the writer are substantially those of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart in his commentary. The Prophet is chiefly occupied in this chapter⁠—as indeed in most of his prophetic record⁠—with what should befall his people in the latter days. They were to exist as a weak and feeble nation for a long period, in the neighborhood of a great and cruel nation under successive dynasties, and at length a fierce and terrible persecutor should arise in the person of Antiochus Epiphanes⁠—the “ little horn ”⁠—by whom the daily sacrifice should be taken away. But God would preside over these mighty agencies, and bring them to an end in his own good time. This is represented by <abbr>vs.</abbr> 9⁠–⁠12. The Prophet sees a court organized: thrones are put in place: the Ancient of days is seated as Judge, surrounded by myriads of angels in waiting to hear and execute his decrees. The books are opened, and the facts adduced. The verdict is given and executed. These kingdoms are among the things that were; and especially is the beast of the little horn slain, and his body destroyed and given to the burning flame. Antiochus the persecutor is brought to a sudden and terrible death.</p>
			<p>The next great fact of importance to the holy people, is the advent of their Messiah, and the introduction of the Messianic Dispensation. This is represented in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 13, 14. One “like to a son of man” is seen enthroned on moving clouds. He approaches the Ancient of days and receives from him a glorious and everlasting kingdom.</p>
			<p>It is with reference to this scene, and the language employed to describe it, that <em>Christ is called “The Son of Man,” and his inauguration as “Head over all things to the church” described as “The Son of Man coming in his kingdom”</em>⁠—“<em>in his glory</em>”⁠—“<em>in the glory of his Father</em>.” <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 16:27, 28; 25:31.</p>
			<p>There is of course an especial appropriateness in applying to the Messiah as God manifest in the flesh, and while acting as the man Christ Jesus, the designation “Son of Man.” The Scriptures are emphatic in declaring and in making prominent as a great fact, that Christ was a real and proper man, made of a woman. And it is doubtless for this purpose that Christ so often calls himself the Son of Man. Still this phrase with its adjuncts as quoted above has evident reference to <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:13. See <abbr>Ezek.</abbr> 1:26⁠–⁠28. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 1:13.</p>
			<p>Let us now turn to the New Testament, and see if its language does not admit of easy explanation on this hypothesis.</p>
			<p>Matthew 10:23.</p>
			<p>“But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.”</p>
			<p>This is an extract from the instructions which the Saviour gave to his disciples as he sent them forth to preach and to say, “The kingdom of heaven is at hand.” He did not conceal from them, he distinctly forewarned them, that they would suffer persecution. But let them be encouraged: the glorious event which was to be the burden of their message, and to prepare men for which, their work, was very near. Before they should have gone over the cities of Israel in their missionary tour, it would become reality. The Messianic Dispensation would be commenced.</p>
			<p>This language of the Saviour decides positively that by the coming of the Son of Man was meant, not his appearance in the flesh, nor the commencement of his public ministry, but an event then future, yet near. Understood as referring to <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:13, 14, it would imply the introduction of the Christian Dispensation.</p>
			<p>Matthew 16:27, 28.</p>
			<p>“For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his works. (28) Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.”</p>
			<p>Here are two facts that have greatly embarrassed commentators. 1. The Son of Man would <em>soon</em>⁠—during the life of some who heard him⁠—come in his kingdom⁠—in the glory of his Father with his angels. “ Shall come,” <i xml:lang="el">μέλλει ἔρχεσθαι</i>, is now about to come. 2. His “coming” would imply his elevation to the office of Judge of all men. “Then,” that is, when he comes and receives his kingdom, he would reward <em>every man</em> according to his works. Henceforth the Father would judge no man, having committed all judgment unto the Son. John 5:22, 27</p>
			<p>That the phraseology of these verses⁠—“Son of Man”⁠—“Come in the glory of his Father with his angels”⁠—“See the Son of Man coming”⁠—not now to receive, but having received and thus “in his kingdom”⁠—is derived from <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 7:13, 14, will not, we think, be questioned by any. The parallel text in Mark (9:1) is “till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power” (<i xml:lang="el">ἐν δυνάμει</i>). In Luke (9:27), “till they see the kingdom of God.” The equivalent import of these several forms of expression is worthy of notice.</p>
			<p>The attempt to make the assurance that some of those present should <em>see</em> Christ in his kingdom, refer to his transfiguration (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Bib.</abbr> Repository</i>, 1842, <abbr>p.</abbr> 335), is simply puerile. The transfiguration occurred but six days after the utterance of this language. Gravely to assure an audience (it did not consist of the disciples merely, Mark 8:34) that some of them would be living at the end of six days, were ludicrous. Besides, the transfiguration was not the Son of Man coming in his kingdom. His kingdom had in no sense commenced. He afterwards speaks of his coming in his kingdom, as yet future. (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 19:28; 25:31.)</p>
			<p>To make these verses refer to the “Final Judgment,” considered as a great fact coming in immediate sequence to the “end of the world,” and the closing up of the history of the race on the earth, is to violate the plainest laws of language. More than eighteen hundred years have elapsed since this language was uttered, and the world is now standing and the Judgment therefore yet future. How then say that some who heard it should <em>see</em> the coming of this august day?</p>
			<p>Yet again: The occasion which led to the remark forbids such a construction. The Saviour had just before informed his disciples that he was to “suffer many things;” and that they, as his disciples, must be sufferers also. And they were in danger of discouragement while suffering for one whose condition was so humble, and who seemed so far from having it in his power to remunerate them for their fidelity. But he assured them that he should soon assume a new condition and appear in glory. His cause, therefore, was not a hopeless cause, nor were his disciples following a phantom.</p>
			<p>Matthew 19:27⁠–⁠29.</p>
			<p>“Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore? (28) And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. (29) And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, shall receive a hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.”</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="el">Παλιγγενεσία</i>, <em>regeneration</em>, denotes that regenerated state of the cause of religion implied in the introduction of the reign of the Messiah. At that time he would sit on his throne, and administer the divine government and grace. And his disciples would then, as Apostles, occupy places of great honor in the church. The regenerated state referred to, was the kingdom of Christ in the world. Israel would then be regenerate and spiritual. The pointing of the common translation, in many editions, is not correct. Jt should be thus: “Ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>That this language may have a sort of application to Christians while suffering in this world and with reference to their reward in a future, is doubtless true. But that this was the primary import in the mind of the Saviour, or was so understood by the disciples, we cannot believe. The disciples at this time knew but little of, and were but slightly influenced by, a reference to a future state. While, of the kingdom of the Messiah as to be developed in this world, they had read and thought much. Their conceptions of what was implied in their sitting on thrones, must, of course, have been inadequate. Little did they think of what was to be their influence as Apostles and preachers of the truths of the kingdom; and still less, that as inspired writers, they should one day govern, with absolute sway, the human race.</p>
			<p>That this is the import of the promise appears further from verse 29: “ Every one that. hath forsaken houses or brethren, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, for my name’s sake, shall receive a hundred-fold, and shall inherit everlasting life. Here the hundred-fold is what had been promised in the preceding verse, and the everlasting life is an advance upon that. As if he had said; Not only is all that I have said true of your position and privileges in that future kingdom, of which you have thought and read so much in the Prophets; but beyond all that, and of which you have as yet but the faintest conception, there is another and higher world in which you shall receive an exceeding and eternal weight of glory.</p>
			<p>Matthew 13:24⁠–⁠30, 36⁠–⁠43.</p>
			<p>“Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: (25) But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. (26) But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also. (27) So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then hath it tares? (28) He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up? (29) But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. (30) Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn.”</p>
			<p>“ (36).⁠ ⁠… His disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. (87) He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; (38) The field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one; (39) The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. (40) As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it be in the end of this world. (41) The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; (42) And shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. (43) Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.”</p>
			<p>The question is⁠—What did the disciples understand by this parable and the explanation of it? And what did the Saviour know they would, and therefore design they should understand by it? Let it be remembered that in this same chapter (<abbr>v.</abbr> 11) the Saviour had told the disciples that it was given to them to know the mysteries of the kingdom, while to others it was not given: and that, therefore, he was ready to give to them any explanations they might ask. And he did explain to them the parable of the sower, and also, that of the tares.</p>
			<p>And if these parables and several others that were uttered at the same time are examined, it will be seen that their primary and special application was to <em>the hearers and the men of that day</em>⁠—the duties and the facts of that period. Thus in the parable of the sower (<abbr>v.</abbr> 21): “ When <em>tribulation or persecution</em> ariseth because of the word, by and by he is offended,”⁠—referring to the trials to which the first disciples were subjected by the malice of the Jews. So when (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 31⁠–⁠33) the kingdom of heaven is compared to a grain of mustard-seed, and to leaven, the reference is to the <em>beginnings</em> of that kingdom in that day. And in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 44⁠–⁠46 where this kingdom is represented as treasure hid in a field and <em>found</em>⁠—as a pearl of great price <em>found</em> by a merchant-man, reference is to the kingdom of the Messiah as now introduced to the world, and the <em>discovery</em> of the fact as made by men. These all point to the hearers and to their particular circumstances and times. Was the same true of the parable of the tares, and of the net ?⁠—for it will be admitted that they both refer to the same thing.</p>
			<p>The Saviour asked them (<abbr>v.</abbr> 51) if they understood all these things. They answered in the affirmative. Christ knew what they understood. He did not, as on other occasions when they were in error, correct them. <em>What, therefore, they understood him to say, that he did say.</em> And that is the meaning of his words to us.</p>
			<p>Putting ourselves, then, in the condition of the disciples, let us interpret, as they would, the parable.</p>
			<p>He that soweth the good seed is the Son of Man. This defines the time as that in which the designation “Son of Man” was applied to the Saviour. The disciples would think only of the then present time in which their Master was inculcating the truths of the new dispensation he was introducing to the world.</p>
			<p>The field is the world (<i xml:lang="el">κόσμος</i>), society, the community, all to whom the gospel of the kingdom was preached.</p>
			<p>The harvest is the end of the dispensation (<i xml:lang="el">αἰῶνος</i>, and <abbr>v.</abbr>40 <i xml:lang="el">αἰῶνος τούτου</i>, <em>this</em> dispensation). In <abbr>vs.</abbr> 39⁠–⁠41 the reference is to the same facts as in <abbr>chap.</abbr> 24:31. In the latter case they are represented as gathering the wheat; while here they are spoken of as gathering the tares. A separation of the good from the bad is in both cases indicated. The connection in one case requires a reference to the good, in the other to the evil. In the one case, Christ was reproving and admonishing the wicked Jews, and warning them of their doom as the tares in the Saviour’s field. In the other case, the disciples were to be comforted and their hopes encouraged by the assurance that the Saviour was to gather a pure and holy church to be organized on the principle of personal holiness in the individual members, and to be composed in part of the Jews.</p>
			<p>This gathering of the wheat by a process that should eliminate the tares⁠—the organization of a church of personally religious members, was not to take place till after the resurrection, when Christ should have retired from sight to the sphere of faith. He would then “send forth his angels” (<i xml:lang="el">ἀγγέλους</i>, <em>messengers</em>), that is, employ an appropriate agency in organizing his church.</p>
			<p>The tares are to be burned⁠—cast into a furnace of fire. This refers to the fearful evils that were to come upon the unbelieving portion of the Jewish nation. See <abbr>chap.</abbr> 23:34⁠–⁠39; 24:2, 21, 29.</p>
			<p>In this parable the Saviour taught the disciples that the Jewish church was hopeless of reformation. The attempt to gather the tares would root up the wheat also. It was no part of the errand of the Messiah to reform the Jewish church. It was to be destroyed, and a new one, organized on a new principle, to succeed.</p>
			<p>“Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father.” This new church to be organized on the day of Pentecost was to be a “glorious church,” and in its progressive sanctification and its earnest work of faith and labor of love, exhibit such a scene as earth had witnessed never.</p>
			<p>Precisely this it is which is foretold in <abbr>Dan.</abbr> 12:2, 3. After the destruction of Antiochus Epiphanes (<abbr>Dan.</abbr> 11:45), and after the relief and partial prosperity which Michael the prince of the Jews should secure to them; there would be a time of trouble such as there never was since there was a nation⁠—but from which all who are written in the books should be delivered. In other words, the wheat would be saved when the tares were cast into the furnace of fire.</p>
			<p>But this shining forth of the righteous as the sun in the kingdom of their Father has a broader import than that a few comparatively of the Jews should be saved. Daniel sees them that sleep in the dust of the earth⁠—“the very clods of Gentilism”⁠—awake under the new power of a new dispensation. And though some of them awake to despise and wonder, and to find the gospel a savor of death unto death, yet others obey and live, and Jew and Gentile, now one in Christ, compose a church active and successful in turning many to righteousness, and as such, shining as the brightness of the firmament and as the stars forever and ever.</p>
			<p>The Prophet Joel (2:28⁠–⁠32) refers also to the same facts. “And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: (29) And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I pour out my Spirit. (30) And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. (31) The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come. (32) And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.”</p>
			<p>Verses 28, 29 were fulfilled on the day of Pentecost. See Acts 2:16⁠–⁠21. Verses 30, 31 had their accomplishment in the destruction of the Jews⁠—the burning of the tares. Verse 32, “ Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved”⁠—is the gathering of the wheat⁠—the gathering of Christ’s elect (<abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:31).</p>
			<p>Such, it is believed, is the import of the parable of the tares, as addressed to the disciples. These disciples had no such practical convictions of a future state, or such knowledge of the glory of Christ’s kingdom as reaching away into the infinite and eternal of that state, as to lead them to refer this parable to the heaven and hell that are there. Besides, the truth which we find in the parable was truth of the utmost practical importance to them at that time, in order to act well their part in the scenes but just before them. The kingdom of the Messiah was to be introduced with them as leading actors. A new and spiritual church was to be organized: the old Jewish church was to be abandoned as hopeless of reformation⁠—as doomed in the providence of God to destruction. But the New Church, in the establishment of which they were to be leaders, though it must encounter difficulties and dangers to its friends, was yet sure of success; was soon to be invested with glory⁠—a glory in which they would be participators. How natural, therefore, that these chosen actors in this work should be told just these things.</p>
			<p>But we shall be told, the language “shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father,” cannot have application to earth. Why not? Is not the kingdom of God “within” us? Did not the Saviour come into this world-to prepare and espouse to himself “a glorious church?” Will the objector read Isaiah lx, which certainly refers to the Church of the Messiah on earth. The fact is, the Christians of this day need the moral power of this language as understood to apply to the church on earth. It will elevate their aims; it will magnify to them the grace, of which Christ is “full,” and of which they may receive in the largest measure⁠—“even grace for grace” (John 1:14, 16). It is believed that modem commentators need only a more adequate conception of what is the essential glory, and of what is to be, one day, the manifested glory of the kingdom of Christ, to. interpret more correctly the language of the Saviour to his disciples⁠—and the language of the inspired writers generally. The absolute violence perpetrated upon the closing chapters of Revelation, had never been but for this reason. In these chapters earth is not taken to heaven, but heaven brought down to earth. And here⁠—in this world⁠—the theatre of the Saviour’s great work, is that work brought to its perfection and glory⁠—to the praise of the great Actor.</p>
			<p>If it be objected to this interpretation, that “all things that offend and that do iniquity” are to be gathered “<em>out of</em> his kingdom”⁠—<i xml:lang="el">ἐκ τῆς βασιλείας</i>⁠—whereas his kingdom is, on our hypothesis, not yet organized; we reply, first, that a close and very rigid exegesis will find difficulties on the common hypothesis. The Messianic church is not strictly the organizations of professed disciples that bear that name, but real Christians: and “ out of” that church none are to be gathered for destruction. Besides, on the common hypothesis, are the angels to be sent forth on the day of judgment, only to gather the hypocrites “out of” the church?</p>
			<p>The true explanation, whether on the present, or the common theory of application, doubtless is, that “kingdom ” is to be understood in the larger sense as including those who, in various degrees, avow a sort of friendship and respect for Christ. A reference to the parable of the sower in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 3⁠–⁠9, 18⁠–⁠23 of this same chapter will make this obvious. The Saviour, by proclaiming, in his own person and by his disciples, the “ word of the kingdom,” was sowing the seed. The reception and the effect of the word was various in the case of different individuals⁠—of those who on the whole were inclined to look upon the Saviour with favor. There were hearers represented by the seed by the way-side, in stony places, among thorns, and in good ground. These all would seem to be represented by “the kingdom” as it was at that time, and before the more formal organization of the Christian church, or introduction of the Christian dispensation. See Luke 14:20⁠–⁠33.</p>
			<p>Thus understood, a prominent object of the parable was to inculcate the great doctrine of a church to be composed of those only who were personally holy.</p>
			<p>Does not this parable as ordinarily understood, forbid all discipline in the church? Wheat and tares should grow together till the Judgment.</p>
			<p>Matthew 13:47⁠–⁠50.</p>
			<p>“The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind: (48) Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. (49) So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, (50) And shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.”</p>
			<p>If we are correct in our interpretation of the parable of the tares, the interpretation of this is very obvious. The same great truth of so much immediate practical importance to the disciples is taught. A church is to be gathered on the principle of personal religious character. The agency of the kingdom of heaven would reach out and affect a great multitude. The day was near when the net would be drawn in, and while the good would be saved the bad would be thrown away. So it would be at the end of the dispensation (<i xml:lang="el">αἰῶνος</i>).</p>
			<p>Luke 18:1⁠–⁠8.</p>
			<p>“And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint; (2) Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man: (3) And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. (4) And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man, (5) Yet, because this widow troubleth me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me. (6) And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. (7) And shall not God avenge his own elect, which ery day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? (8) I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?”</p>
			<p>These verses should have been connected with the preceding chapter, as they are a part of what the Saviour said of his coming and of the destruction of Jerusalem. Let his disciples pray and not faint, nor tire of waiting. God would avenge his own elect, though he might seem to delay in respect to them. He would avenge them speedily. The day was now very near when the Son of Man would be “revealed” or appear in his kingdom. And although that would not lift his disciples into a condition that would exclude a liability to, and the experience of, persecution ; yet they would be the subjects of such an elevation of character, and of such large and heavenly experience, that they would be able to tread all these external circumstances of discouragement under their feet. They would be conquerors and more than conquerors over all the power of the adversary.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless⁠—though these promises were given, and though they should soon be fulfilled, and that soul ennobling and soul sustaining kingdom be introduced to the world, ⸺ would men, and especially the Jews, believe in it, and in its divine Head? This interrogation is equivalent to a negative assertion.</p>
			<p>Subordinate Texts</p>
			<p>As illustrating the principle that the parables addressed to the Pharisees and the Jews generally “meant them,” we ask the reader’s attention to the following⁠—though they have not a specific bearing on “The coming of the Son of Man.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Matt.</abbr> 21:28⁠–⁠32. “What think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. (29) He answered and said, I will not; but afterward he repented, and went. (30) And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir; and went not. (31) Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. (32) For John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him.”</p>
			<p>No one will doubt that this language was aimed at the chief priests and the elders (<abbr>v.</abbr> 23) then present. As of John, so of the Messiah: the Pharisees and those laying claim to especial sanctity⁠—who said, “I go sir,” rejected him. While those who made no pretensions to religious character, and whose open and flagrant sins prepared them for easy conviction, and⁠—under the influence of his kindness and proffered mercy⁠—for repentance, accepted him, and were saved. And while the Jews as a nation rejected him, the Gentiles would hear and believe and become his disciples.</p>
			<p>Verses 33⁠–⁠45. “Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a wine press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country: (34) And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it. (35) And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another. (36) Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise. (37) But last of all he sent unto them his son, saying, They will reverence my son. (38) But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. (39) And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. (40) When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do unto those husbandmen? (41) They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons. (42) Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? (43) Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. (44) And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. (45) And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them.”</p>
			<p>It will be admitted by all that this parable had reference to the Jews as a nation. The cause of God was the “vineyard ;” the Jews the “husbandmen;” the “servants” were “prophets and wise men and scribes” (<abbr>chap.</abbr> 23:34); “his son” was Jesus Christ; the destruction of the husbandmen was the overthrow of the Jews and their rejection as the people of God; the “other husbandmen” were the Gentiles. “ The chief priests and Pharisees perceived that he spake of <em>them</em>.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Matt.</abbr> 22:1⁠–⁠14. “And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said, (2) The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, (3) And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come. (4) Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto the marriage. (5) But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: (6) And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. (7) But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. (8) Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy. (9) Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage. (10) So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests. (11) And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment: (12) And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless. (13) Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. (14) For many are called, but few are chosen.”</p>
			<p>This parable, like the preceding, had direct and pointed reference to the time then passing. This great feast was now ready. The Messiah had come, and they as Jews were first invited. They rejected the blessings of his kingdom and were to be destroyed. The Gentiles were to be invited and would accept, and the wedding would be furnished with guests.</p>
			<p>Verses 11⁠–⁠14 were designed to give intensity to the idea that the new church of the Messiah was to be composed of persons “chosen” on the ground of personal holiness. If any one of the “called” had come and incorporated himself with the elect, while destitute of the personal qualifications, he was, when so convicted, to be ejected. The Jew must not rely on his nationality. He could not on that ground be admitted to the church of the Messiah. And if he entered on that principle, he must be cast out and numbered with unbelievers, whose end was destruction.</p>
			<p>If any doubt to whom this parable was addressed, let them read the remainder of the chapter, and especially verses 15, 16, 23, 34, 41, and they will learn who furnished the occasion for uttering it, and were deeply interested and excited hearers. And let them then read <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. — that fearful, awful chapter.</p>
			<p>And⁠—to recur to the parables of the sower and of the tares (<abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>.)⁠—let a similar process be adopted. Let <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. be read, with special reference to the persons present and addressed; let Jesus be followed from the house to the sea-side, where he went, the better to accommodate the “ great multitude” desirous to hear him, and who were looking not to future generations as to be benefited by the instructions of the great Teacher, but to <em>themselves and the present</em>, and let it be asked if these parables had not a specific application to these hearers, as Jews, and Jews to whom the Son of Man had come as the Messiah, who were now by him addressed, and who were soon as a nation to meet the consequences of the rejection of his messages.</p>
			<p>Matthew 24.</p>
			<p>Few portions of the Scriptures have embarrassed commentators more than this. And it is evident that few, if any, who have attempted its exegesis, have satisfied either themselves or others. Such principles of interpretation have been applied to it, as, applied to any other book than the Bible, would have been ridiculed and scouted by the literary world. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes on verse 3, has the following: “There are three questions here: 1st. When those things should take place. 2d. What should be the signs of his coming. 3d. What should be the signs that the end of the world was near. To these questions he [the Saviour] replies in this and the following chapters. This he does, not by noticing them distinctly, but by intermingling the descriptions of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world; so that it is sometimes difficult to tell to what particular subject his remarks apply. The <em>principle</em> on which this combined description of two events was spoken, appears to be that <em>they could be described in the same words</em>, and, therefore, the accounts are intermingled.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			<p><em>Is</em> this true? <em>Must</em> it be admitted by scholars that a principle so indeterminate and unsatisfactory is to be applied to the interpretation of the Bible? If so, then we shall be attached to our Bible, not from any intellectual conviction of its truths in detail; but⁠—if at all⁠—because there is an atmosphere about it in general, that the heart loves, and will love in despite of potent elements of repulsion. No man stands <em>firm</em> on convictions reached by the application of such principles of exegesis. From the nature of the human mind it must be so. And that commentators are driven to the necessity of admitting them is evidence conclusive that they are in error, and are putting forced and untruthful constructions upon the sacred word. In the attempt to show a more excellent way, may the Spirit of the Lord pour light upon the words of the Saviour, and so show to us the thread of truth that we shall find a facile pathway along its line.</p>
			<p>The Saviour had just been delivering (<abbr>chap.</abbr> 23:32⁠–⁠39) some terrible rebukes to the Scribes and Pharisees, and concluded by telling them that the Jews were ripe for destruction. The nation had a long account to settle. And it must be met by this generation. He declared the special divine protection withdrawn from them as a nation. Their house was left unto them desolate. If blessings were henceforth to come upon any of them, it would be upon such as should own him as Messiah (<abbr>v.</abbr>39).</p>
			<p>As he left the temple with his disciples⁠—though probably not until they were ascending Olivet, where the temple and the city would be full in view, he remarked, with obvious reference to what he had just said to the Jews, “There shall not be left one stone upon another that shall not be thrown down.” This was of course understood by the disciples to imply not only the demolition of the city, but the overthrow of the nation; and, as implied in such a national catastrophe, the subversion of the Jewish religion and the termination of the Mosaic Institute. And they would have been prepared to put this construction upon his language and these facts, from his own previous instruction. The parables of the tares and of the net, also, were designed to teach them this, and they doubtless so understood them. And they expected in immediate sequence to all this the glories⁠—of which they had but inadequate conceptions⁠—of the kingdom of which their Master was to be king.</p>
			<p>They therefore inquire with interest, “When shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy coming and of the end of the <em>dispensation</em>” (<i xml:lang="el">αἰῶνος</i>)?</p>
			<p>Should <i xml:lang="el">αἰών</i> here be rendered dispensation? We answer unhesitatingly, Yes; and for the following reasons.</p>
			<p>1. The word has obviously this meaning in various connections in the New Testament. <i xml:lang="el">Αἰών</i> signifies primarily a period of time indefinite, only as limits are inferred from its adjuncts. As such it is used in the Old Testament to render <span xml:lang="he">עוֹלָם</span>. As applied to man, it signifies <em>lifetime</em>. As applied to the different forms of religious administration over men, as Patriarchal, Mosaic, or Christian, its import is <em>dispensation</em>. As applied to the endless future of man <i xml:lang="el">εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας</i>, it may suggest that changes without end are before us, each witnessing to developments in advance of the past.</p>
			<p>2. The structure of the sentence requires this rendering. Nothing could be made more certain by the structure of language, than that the coming of Christ and the end of the <i xml:lang="el">αἰών</i> were considered by the speaker as synchronical.</p>
			<p>3. The parallel texts demand this construction here. In Mark (13:4) it is, “When shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?” The verb rendered fulfilled (<i xml:lang="el">συντελεῖσθαι</i>) is from the same radical elements as the noun (<i xml:lang="el">συντελείας</i>) rendered <em>end</em> in Matthew. It signifies from the force of the preposition (<i xml:lang="el">σύν</i>) <em>to be brought to one end</em> <strong>together</strong>⁠—<em>at the same time</em>;⁠—forbidding the supposition that the end of one of the things about which inquiry is made is to be in one age of the world and the other in a different age. What then, we ask, are “all these things” that are to be brought to their consummation at the same time? Obviously, the things of which the Saviour had just spoken, namely, the terrible calamities that were to befall the Jews, involving the destruction of the city and the nation, and⁠—by necessary consequence, since church and state were inseparably united⁠—the termination of the Mosaic Institute. Matthew goes more into specification. Mark embraces all in “these things.” So also of Luke (21:7). Not one word had the Saviour said about the end of the world. There was nothing in the circumstances that would lead to the mention of that subject.</p>
			<p>4. The easy and obvious relations of the reply, on this hypothesis. This will be seen in the sequel.</p>
			<p>5. We avoid those monstrous principles of interpretation which strip the Bible of any certain meaning, and allow men of imaginative minds or depraved hearts to put any construction upon its language they may choose.</p>
			<p>6. Finally, the Bible nowhere else tells us any thing about an end of the world, that is, as a physical catastrophe. Why then make <i xml:lang="el">συντέλεια αἰῶνος</i> signify that which we have no authority from either heaven or earth⁠—the Bible or geology⁠—for believing?</p>
			<p>We proceed, then, to the answer of the Saviour to the inquiry, When shall these things of which he had spoken be, and what shall be the sign of them, to wit, of his coming and of the end of the dispensation.</p>
			<p>The precise day and hour was not revealed: he could only say to them that it would be during the present generation (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 34, 36).</p>
			<p>But the “<em>signs</em>” of the great event would be many, and such as to enable the faithful and the watchful to escape the evils that would come upon their countrymen. These facts that would precede the destruction of the city and nation the Saviour enumerates. There should be false Christs (<abbr>v.</abbr> 9); wars, famines, pestilences, earthquakes (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 6, 7); the disciples would be persecuted (<abbr>v.</abbr> 9); professed friends would apostatize, and hate and betray their brethren (<abbr>v.</abbr> 10); false teachers would arise and mislead many (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 11, 12); the Gospel would be preached to all nations (<abbr>v.</abbr> 14); and finally a hostile army would approach the city (<abbr>v.</abbr>15). This would be the signal for the disciples to flee from the city, and without the least delay (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 16⁠–⁠22). Nor should they be dissuaded from their flight by any pretending to be Christ⁠—for such there would be (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 23- 28).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> These predictions were fulfilled. And the disciples, forewarned by this language of the Saviour, did, in fact, flee from Jerusalem, and took refuge in the city of Pella, and were there in safety.</p>
			<p>Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the Jewish state, civil and ecclesiastical, was subverted (<abbr>v.</abbr> 29). Christianity thus became <em>the sole divinely authorized Religion in the world</em>. The enthronement of the Son of Man (<abbr>v.</abbr> 30)⁠—now the Son of God in power (<abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4) became more and more apparent. In the employment of an appropriate agency he gathered in his elect from all parts of the world, and the Christian church became established.</p>
			<p>It is objected that such language as <abbr>vs.</abbr> 29, 30, is too awfully significant to have an application to such an event as the destruction of a single nation. Let the reader turn to Joel 2:30, 31, and he will find the language of imagery equally bold and almost the very same; and which Peter on the day of Pentecost declares applied to the fearful events that were to come in sequence of the pouring out of the Spirit on that day (Acts 2:16⁠–⁠21)⁠—the very events here predicted. Other instances of the use of similar language to denote similar events may be found in the prediction of the destruction of Babylon (<abbr>Isa.</abbr> 13:10, 18)⁠—of Idumea (<abbr>Isa.</abbr> 34:4, 5). It is just such language as a reader of the Old Testament would be expected to use in the circumstances.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></p>
			<p>Matthew 25.</p>
			<p>The preceding chapter has brought us to the complete introduction of the Christian Dispensation.</p>
			<p>The Saviour therefore proceeds in this chapter to speak of that Dispensation⁠—<em>the principles on which it is administered, and the condition and conduct of men under it</em>. This he does from three different points of observation⁠—presenting the duties which men owe to themselves (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠18)⁠—to Christ (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 14⁠–⁠30)⁠—to each other (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 31⁠–⁠46).</p>
			<p>Verses 1⁠–⁠13. Just before the Saviour left the world, he told his disciples (John 14:2, 3) that he should leave them; he was going to heaven; but he would soon come again and take them to himself, that they might behold his glory. For a while. he -would be present with them only to their faith. Soon, however, they would experience such a change in the mode of being, that he would be subject to their immediate recognition; they would know as they were known. The allusion is to this fact in the parable of the ten virgins. The parable in its primary application was to those who had known him as the Man Christ Jesus. He was about to leave them; but would soon return, and in circumstances of peculiar interest. They must be ready <em>in personal character</em> to meet him and to participate with him in his glory; or in default of such personal preparation, be cast out. This was in keeping with what he had so often said of the Christian church as to be organized on the basis of <em>personal holiness</em> in the members.</p>
			<p>The conduct of men as subjected to the influence of Christianity is also represented. Some, recognizing it as a glorious means of salvation, would be truly wise, and prepare to meet Christ in heaven. Others, knowing indeed that it was such a means of salvation, would treat it with a degree of respect, and devote some attention to it⁠—but lack the essential element of a true preparation. And this not from positive hostility, but from sheer neglect. So is it in fact with multitudes to whom the Gospel is addressed. They perish from sheer neglect. There are, in the essential nature of things, conditions of salvation; they do not comply with them: subjective elements of character indispensable; they do not possess them.</p>
			<p>In <abbr>v.</abbr> 13 the words “wherein the Son of man cometh” are to be considered as not genuine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Clarke has the following: “These words are omitted by many excellent <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, most of the versions, and several of the Fathers. <em>Griesbach</em> has left them out of the text; <em>Grotius</em>, <em>Hammond</em>, <em>Mill</em>, and <em>Bengel</em>, approve of the omission.” Knapp marks these words as “<i xml:lang="la">sine dubio spuria</i>.” Rosenmueller omits them. Kuinoel says that most of the manuscripts and versions of highest authority, as also the Fathers, omit; but adds, “<i xml:lang="la">Sensus tamen idem manet</i>” (the sense remains the same)⁠—which is very far from true. The coming of the Son of Man is not represented in this parable. It is the <i xml:lang="el">παρουσία τοῦ κυρίου</i>, the Coming of the Lord.</p>
			<p>Verses 14⁠–⁠30. The parable of the talents represents men as the <em>agents</em> of Christ, to whom are committed his interests; and as rewarded of him for their fidelity. This parable covers the ground occupied by the church as the official agency addressed by the commission, “Disciple all nations,” “Preach the gospel to every creature.” Here again, as in the parable of the virgins, the Lord is for a time away. But he comes at death and settles with his servants. So, too, in this, neglect is ruin. Not to do is death.</p>
			<p>This too, like the preceding parable, had a special or primary application to those whom he addressed. The lord was with the servants, but was to “go away.” So Christ was, when he uttered this, “ with” the disciples and friends, but was to go away and “come again.” In this particular it was applicable only to the generation then living.</p>
			<p>Verses 31⁠–⁠46. These verses are of a mixed character, partly descriptive and partly parabolic⁠—like the parable of the rich man and Lazarus. The opening sentence is figuratively descriptive. “When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him,” that is, when he shall have been invested with the functions of Messiahship, “then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory,” or his glorious throne; that is, he will be invested with supreme and absolute authority as “Head over all things.” “All nations” shall be amenable to him, and receive their destiny at his hands, and on a principle that may be illustrated by the scene which follows as of a King on his throne giving a verdict as to his subjects. Yet even in this parabolic scene the reader is reminded most impressively that the King is Christ himself, by the language, “Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.”</p>
			<p>The generic principle at the basis of this parable, is, that we shall be called to an account for our treatment of our fellow men; and especially our treatment of Christians, love to whom as such, or its opposite, is essentially love or its opposite to Christ. So that now⁠—as it will be in the future judgment⁠—the spirit we manifest towards Christians is the true index of our feelings towards him.</p>
			<p>These verses are no otherwise descriptive of the day of Judgment, than is the parable of the talents, or that of the virgins. Each represents a principle on which that judgment will proceed; and that is all. The opening sentence, “When the Son of man shall come in his glory,” does not refer to a future judgment, but to his investiture with the office of Messiahship. The fact of a judgment after death, and that it will be before Jesus Christ is most solemnly and impressively taught.</p>
			<p>The following from Neander is entitled to and will receive careful attention from all who know his great intellectual and moral worth: “On the whole, then, we are not to look upon this representation as a picture of the final judgment. Its aim is to set forth most vividly and impressively the great and fundamental truth, that no faith but that which proves itself by works, can secure the kingdom of heaven. We cannot fail to see in the ‘throne’ the ‘right hand,’ the ‘left hand,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr>, a figurative drapery attending and setting off the one fundamental thought.⁠ ⁠… . The form of description, then, we suppose to be parabolical, and its character in this respect was probably still more obvious when Christ delivered it.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Christ</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 375.</p>
			<p><abbr>Matt.</abbr> 26:63, 64.</p>
			<p>“The high-priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. (64) Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.”</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless;” <i xml:lang="el">πλήν</i>, <em>moreover, besides</em>. “Hereafter;” <i xml:lang="el">ἀπάρτι</i>, <em>henceforth</em>.</p>
			<p>This text is significant as showing the difference between the designations “Son of Man” and “Son of God.” The Son of God was the Son of Man glorified and invested with the functions of Messiahship. When interrogated whether he were the Son of God he admitted that he was, but with the qualification that he was about to be exalted to the right hand of power. He was the personage that was just to be the Son of God. The high-priest did not, in putting the question, make this distinction, but designed merely to ask if he was the promised Messiah. And it was to this question that Jesus answered yes⁠—and the subsequent remark was demanded by the incorrect language of the interrogator. When Nathanael, early in the ministry of Christ, avowed his belief in him as the Son of God, the King of Israel, he commended his faith, but referred him to the methods of glorification which God would employ to constitute and manifest him such. He would “see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.” John 1:49⁠–⁠51.</p>
			<p>The parallel text in Luke is still more emphatic as to the immediate sequence to the present transactions, of his full investiture with the character of the Son of God. The expression is <i xml:lang="el">ἀπὸ τοῦ νῦν</i> (literally <em>from now</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> <em>immediately</em> and <em>henceforth</em>), shall the Son of Man sit on the right hand of the power of God (Luke 22:69). This points to the fact that the Son of Man became the Son of God when he rose from the dead (<i xml:lang="el">ἐξ ἀναστάσεως</i>, <abbr>Rom.</abbr> 1:4). When he had purged our sin, he sat down on the right hand of God.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
