<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Prophecy Restored</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Prophecy has furnished a region in which for imagination to range at will: and no part of the prophetic writings more than the Apocalypse. Not only has it as prophecy been made to assume fantastic shapes; portions of it have been surreptitiously taken from the department of prophecy, and transferred to that of doctrine. The language of imagery and symbol, it has been construed literally. What we propose, in this Chapter, is the work of restoration.</p>
			<section id="chapter-5-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<header>
					<p>Revelation 20⁠–⁠22</p>
				</header>
				<p>Portions of <abbr>chap.</abbr> 20 have been supposed to bear upon the doctrine of the Anastasis. The word <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> occurs in <abbr>v.</abbr> 5. Other portions (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 11⁠–⁠15) are supposed to sustain the doctrine of a future distant day of General Judgment. The writer supposes that in neither instance is there the remotest reference in the direction assumed.</p>
				<p>The object of John, in <abbr>chaps.</abbr> 12⁠–⁠22 of the Apocalypse, was to encourage the Christians of his own and the immediately subsequent generations, by the assurance that the period of persecution would not be long⁠—that Christianity would soon rise into the ascendant; and not only so, but, at a day somewhat remote indeed, so transform human character as to make of our world a new heaven and a new earth.</p>
				<p>Satan is considered as <em>a persecutor</em>; and as such symbolized as a dragon. His leading agents are the beast and the false prophet⁠—the former representing the civil persecuting power ; the latter the sacerdotal organization as engaged with the civil in the same work. The home and centre of operation is Rome, called, in language designedly obscure and unexplained (<i xml:lang="el">μυστήριον</i>) Babylon, as that was the Old Testament power that, more than any other, annoyed the church of God.</p>
				<p>The Lamb appears as a conqueror and overcomes these enemies. The victory, while it is certain, is yet, for a season, delayed. All things seem as if ready for a consummation, yet is it delayed⁠—delayed. Thus, there was decree of toleration after decree, each followed by a revival of the spirit of persecution and the shedding of the blood of the martyrs. But at length came a most decisive termination. Constantine ascended the throne as a Christian emperor.</p>
				<p>Thus far we have followed substantially the exegesis of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart, with this exception, that he makes the delay and the prolongation of the processes of triumph to the church to indicate the prolonged conflict of holiness with sin down to the millennium. Stuart fails to regard with sufficient strictness, though he recognizes the great fact that the Dragon represents Satan <em>as a persecutor</em>, and the beast and the false prophet the civil and sacerdotal agencies of heathendom, <em>as engaged in persecuting the church</em>. ence the victory which this book predicts previous to <abbr>chap.</abbr> 20:10, is victory over Satan <em>as a persecutor</em>. Hence, while the fall of Nero and the close of the then existing persecution is referred to in <abbr>chaps.</abbr> 14 and 17, the <em>delay</em> of the final victory is designed to indicate the fact that the spirit of persecution would live yet longer, and be finally conquered only by the enthronement of Constantine. Satan and the beast and the false prophet will then have done their work. Heathenism will from that time have no power to persecute the church. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart loses sight of the <em>persecuting</em> character of the actors against Christianity, and hence makes the delay refer to the yet future victory of the church over religion. This victory is indicated in <abbr>chap.</abbr> 20:10 <abbr class="eoc">seq.</abbr> Satan as a persecutor is bound <abbr>chap.</abbr> 20:1⁠–⁠3. The friends of Christianity then pass into the ascendant.</p>
				<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> 20:1⁠–⁠7, has a necessary and most intimate logical connection with what immediately precedes. The beast and the false prophet and their empire were destroyed, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 19:19⁠–⁠21. But they were only the agents of “the Dragon, that old serpent,” in other words, of Satan <em>as a persecutor</em>. And the victory could not be considered as achieved till he is overcome. Accordingly, a mighty angel comes down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand. He lays hold of, binds, and casts into the bottomless pit this great enemy of the church, and not only turns the key upon him, but puts a seal upon the fastening, so that he shall by no means go forth till permitted.</p>
				<p>This confinement of Satan <em>as a persecutor</em> was to last.“ a thousand years”⁠—a round and large number to denote an indefinitely long period.</p>
				<p>Verses 4⁠–⁠7. This is a description of the church during “the thousand years.” In <abbr>v.</abbr> 2 the article is wanting before <i xml:lang="el">χίλια ἔτη</i>, but in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 4, 5, it is found; showing that there is a reference to <em>the</em> thousand years first named.</p>
				<p>“Judgment was given to the saints.” Not until now was the prediction of Daniel (7:22) completely fulfilled. But now the civil power was in the hands of Christians, and it has continued so to - the present day. Never since Constantine ascended the throne has Paganism had it in its power to persecute the church; nor has the church been persecuted, save as some portions of the church itself have sometimes persecuted other portions. The prophet in vision saw the “souls” (<i xml:lang="el">τὰς ψυχάς</i>) of those who had been faithful during the period of persecution, that is, good men, living and governing the world, and governing it “with Christ,” and in the spirit of his religion. This can only mean that men of their spirit and character were in the ascendant. The rest of the dead⁠—the wicked men who had figured hitherto as the tools of the dragon⁠—“lived not”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> during this thousand years. This happy and privileged state of the world, when men lived under Christian governments, and amid the influences of Christian religious institutions, was a sort of earnest of heaven⁠—a first anastasis. Blessed and holy men gave character to this period. Isaiah (61:6, 7) had predicted “ Ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord: men shall call you the ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves. For your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they (you) shall rejoice in their portion.” This we understand to be descriptive of the church as it has been from the days of Constantine to the present time, and as it will be for a period, of length unknown to us, in the future. We are of opinion, however, that the time is not distant when a change shall come over the church and the world, such as is described in the succeeding portions of this chapter.</p>
				<p>After this period of the triumphs of religion, Persecution will have a brief space given her. Satan will again act in his old capacity as persecutor of the church of God. But the attempt will be vain and his overthrow complete and final.</p>
				<p>This is just what we should expect from the nature of the human mind and of human depravity. When the church shall become more holy, and her moral power increase in proportion⁠—a power, much of which is yet in waiting to be developed and employed, it will provoke opposition ; it will arouse the spirit of deep depravity in man, and the result will be a decided stand for opposition and for positive aggression.</p>
				<p>Verses 8⁠–⁠10. The allusion to Gog and Magog will be understood by a reference to the prophet Ezekiel, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 39. When that Prophet would predict the triumphs of religion in our world, he employs a scene laid in the Holy Land, and with the holy People in the exercise of their religion with its ms and ceremonies, as actors. David their Prince is to be their king. But as a means of their own higher sanctification, and, at the same time, of bringing to an acquaintance with the true God and the true religion the Gentiles, the Jews are to experience an invasion from the north anda very distant and barbarous country. Gog and Magog, with a mighty host, are poured upon the land of Palestine. But they are signally defeated and utterly destroyed. Now for the effect. “I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. So the house of Israel shall know that I aim the Lord their God, from that day and forward.” <abbr>Ezek.</abbr> 39:21, 22. See also <abbr>vs.</abbr> 23⁠–⁠29. The Prophet in this refers to the very time of which John is speaking. Hence when John would represent the attack of the ireligious and infidel portion of the world upon the church at the time referred to, he employs the name of these barbarous nations. The moral significance of the allusion is, that the assailants of the church will be those at the greatest moral distance from it.</p>
				<p>Verses 11⁠–⁠15. This has been supposed by most interpreters to refer to a day of General Judgment at “the end of the world.” But why insist on taking the language of this book of the boldest poetic imagery literally? We have seen the Apostle in the preceding verses alluding to the imagery of Hzekiel. Here we find him referring to the language of Daniel. Let the reader turn to the seventh chapter of that prophet, so fruitful in suggestions to the writers of the New Testament, and he will find almost the very words here used; especially in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 9⁠–⁠14.. In this chapter, Daniel is considering the great civil powers that had figured largely in the history of the world, and especially that had been important in their influence upon the condition of the holy People. He predicts their overthrow, and that they are to retire from the theatre of the world’s affairs; and that then, the Messiah’s kingdom is to be introduced to the world. How does he do it? The Eternal descends with thousand thousand ministering attendants. He is seated upon a throne. The court is organized. The books are opened. The decision of this august tribunal is forthcoming, and at once executed. These enemies of the church are destroyed. Then comes the Son of Man and receives his kingdom.</p>
				<p>In the scene before us, the Messiah’s kingdom, which, in the vision of Daniel was to be introduced to the world, is to be borne upward to its state of consummated earthly glory. The time is now to be introduced when all shall know the Lord from the least even unto the greatest. Henceforth all the children of earth are to be saved. The prayer which the Saviour has taught his church to offer, and which she has offered in every succeeding age⁠—“Thy kingdom come; <em>thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven</em>”⁠—is to be answered. Death and hell have done their work so far as earth’s future sons are concerned. The new heaven and new earth that Isaiah had predicted, were now to become reality.</p>
				<p>The great fact indicated in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 11⁠–⁠15 is that <em>the wicked have now done their work</em>. “In the wisdom of God,” the world had been, up to this time, the theatre of an amount of sin and suffering fearfully great; growing less and less, however, as this time drew near, and Christianity was accomplishing its work. But now the time has come when wicked men are no longer to be actors in this sublime drama. They are therefore represented as assembled to settle up their accounts with God. And with them, also, are those who have been actors with them, though not of their character. The world of the past, of mixed history, of saints and sinners, is assembled, and “stands before God.” “The books,” the one containing the history of the good, and the other that of the evil, are opened, and men are adjudged every one according to his works. ‘The bad are separated from the good, and cast into the lake of fire. Death and Hades⁠—their work done<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a>⁠—are also cast into the lake of fire. The good alone remain. Of earth’s history, as inhabited by the blessed subjects of the kingdom of the Redeemer, we learn in the following chapter.</p>
				<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> 21. A new scene now opens⁠—the consummated state of the Messiah’s kingdom in this world, <abbr>vs.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠9. There is a new heaven and a new earth; and in this new earth there is no more sea. The human race are now all brought together, and dwell together, as a peaceful and loving family.</p>
				<p>As further to illustrate the great idea that possessed his mind, and was more completely to be introduced to it, he sees the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, <abbr>vs.</abbr> 2⁠–⁠4. This refers to the vision of Ezekiel (<abbr>Ezek.</abbr> 40:2 <abbr>seq.</abbr>). He saw a city, and in it a magnificent Temple, and it was the centre of a religious service conducted in the manner of the Mosaic Institute. This was true, almost without exception, of the visions of the ancient prophets that enter at all into detail. The only conception, to a Jew, of eminent religious prosperity, was under the forms of his own ceremonial. Hence Isaiah, in the sublime conceptions of <abbr>chap.</abbr> lx. makes all nations indeed religious, but they come up to Jerusalem and to the Temple, and lay upon the altar the flocks of Kedar and the rams of Nebaioth. John’s readers did not need this imagery, and accordingly he says, “ I saw no temple therein. And he dispenses entirely with allusion to the Jewish ritual.</p>
				<p>He alludes to the tabernacle of the congregation in the wilderness. God had said to the children of Israel, “I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not abhor you, and I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people” (<abbr>Lev.</abbr> 26:11,12). And accordingly, God was with them. The pillar of cloud and of fire was ever their guide and their protection. When they were to change their place, the cloudy pillar moved, and in the direction in which they should go; when they were to stop, then the cloud was stationary. In the time of danger, the cloud came in between them and their enemies, and kept harm away from them. In allusion to this miraculous interposition for the good of the chosen people, the prophet Isaiah, in representing the privileges of the people of God under the reign of the Messiah, says (4:5, 6), “And the Lord will create upon every dwelling-place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the daytime from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.” So in our text (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 3, 4): “The tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.” When it is said, “there shall be no more death,” we are not to infer that men will not then, as now, pass from the animal to the spiritual body; but it will not be death, it will be a translation. The “sting of death” will be gone, and the “change” (1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:52) will be a welcome event. The sphere of faith will be as actual and as influential in the convictions of men, as is now the sphere of sight. And the appearing (<i xml:lang="el">παρουσία</i>) of the Lord will be the great and inviting fact involved in the event.</p>
				<p>And finally, the great facts before the Apostle and the church are represented in a word: “ Behold, make all things new.” This is the mission of the Messiah. How much is implied in this language, at present “hath not entered into the heart of man.” The direct effects of the system of moral influence embraced in Christianity upon the personal character of man will be great. Paul, in all the richness of his spirit, and the simplicity and vigor of his faith, will not then stand, as now, so nearly alone. But multitudes, perhaps all, will be followers of him, even as he was of Christ. And then the indirect results⁠—the development of the intellectual character of man, and, as a consequence, the knowledge of the sciences, and the application of them te” ale arts, thus modifying his external condition, making of our world, considered as the abode of man, a new earth indeed. How much has Christianity done already in this direction! What is in the future? Who can tell?</p>
				<p>The informing angel now told the Apostle that the series of future events as to be represented in this prophetic vision was completed. “It is done.” He had led the Revelator through the period of persecution, presenting events in much detail. He had then represented a much longer period of comparative prosperity to the church, and in which Satan as a persecutor would have no power. The friends of Christianity would rule the world so far forth that no power could persecute the church. Then amidst the sublime imagery ofa present Deity on the throne of judgment, was represented the closing up of the career of wicked men on the earth, and their hopeless doom. And finally, the state of a triumphant and a consummated Christianity in the hearts and condition of men.</p>
				<p>And now a word of practical application of the vision (<abbr>vs.</abbr> 6⁠–⁠8), to the persons to whom the Apostle would send this his message⁠—having especial reference to those who in the times of persecution would find obedience and duty so difficult: “I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely. He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.” That is, grace in the largest measure and utmost freeness shall be given to all who seek it, and they shall be sustained and made more than conquerors, and heaven at last be theirs. The unfaithful, too, have an admonition. They have seen what is the doom of the wicked, and how hopeless of success. They must be crushed, and cast out into the lake of fire with the beast and the false prophet. Let all then beware.</p>
				<p>The remaining portion of this book (21:9 <abbr>seq.</abbr>) seems as a sort of Appendix or Addenda. The series of events had been completed. But the new Jerusalem, which he had seen coming down from God out of heaven, must be presented with more of detail. God would have the church, in future time, find in it a stronger appeal to its hopes, and the means of a more adequate conviction of what the religion of the gospel is, what its power and efficacy, and with what expectation, therefore, it should be used by the church upon the world.</p>
				<p>Ezekiel (<abbr>chap.</abbr> 40 <abbr>seq.</abbr>) in predicting the precise thing that was the burden of this part of the Apocalypse, is shown a City and Temple, as we have said. This city and temple are described with great minuteness. Everything proceeds on the principles of the Mosaic Ritual. And he closes his description by saying, “And the name of the city from that day shall be, Jehovah is there.”</p>
				<p>So here a magnificent city, of surpassing richness and glory is shown to the Apostle. The splendor of this city is immeasurably in advance of that of Ezekiel. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 16, “The length and the breadth and the height of it are <em>equal</em>”⁠—<i xml:lang="el">ἴσα</i>, which may be rendered here <em>proportional</em>. “And I saw no temple therein” (<abbr>v.</abbr> 22). This indicates the spirituality and wide remove from ceremony, of the worship of this happy period. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. (See <abbr>Heb.</abbr> 8:2.) God and Christ are recognized as everywhere present, and in communion direct with every heart. The language of <abbr>v.</abbr> 23 is borrowed from Isaiah (24:23; 60:19, 20). In <abbr>v.</abbr> 24 the words “of them which are saved” are wanting in the best manuscripts. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Knapp omits them in his Greek Testament. They were probably added by someone who considered the vision as descriptive of heaven, and thought it necessary to guard against the doctrine of universal salvation. When it is read, “The nations shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it,” it becomes significant of precisely the meaning that our interpretation would require. The church in its glory embraces all nations and kings. There shall be none whose names are not written in the Lamb’s book of life.</p>
				<p>Ezekiel saw issuing from the eastern side of the temple, a stream of water, which went off eastward through the valley of Jehoshaphat, increasing as it went, until it poured its waters into the Dead Sea ;⁠—the waters of which were healed. John sees a river of water of life clear as crystal, flowing out from under the throne of God and the Lamb. On its banks is the tree of life, bearing each month, and thus furnishing a constant supply of that fruit which is for the healing of the nations. The allusion is to the garden of Eden, and to that tree of which if a man eat, even after he has fallen under the curse of sin, he shall live forever (<abbr>Gen.</abbr> 3:22). Adam was forbidden access to this tree. But now “ihe nations” have access to it, and: eat and live forever. And hence “there shall be no more curse.” And then, how spiritual shall be that life. “The throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it.” God in his wise and benevolent government, and Christ in all the fullness and freeness of his grace, shall be recognized as present; and all, as his willing, privileged, joyous servants, shall serve him. And finally, these holy and competent men, so under God’s immediate direction, shall govern and control the world, henceforth and forever. “They shall <em>reign</em> forever and ever.”</p>
				<p>That chapters 20⁠–⁠22 do not refer to the future world is obvious from many considerations.</p>
				<p>1. Much of the language, indeed nearly all that is cardinal to the question, is borrowed from the Old Testament, where it is used, not with reference to the future, but to the present world: and to indicate <em>the very facts</em>, to which we have now applied it.</p>
				<p>2. The connection of the thought⁠—the continuity of a series of events⁠—requires our hypothesis. The interpretation we have now given, carries us down in an uninterrupted series of events, from the ~ time of the Apostle to the consummated condition of the Messiah’s kingdom.</p>
				<p>3. We should expect a longer period than one. thousand years of the happy and triumphant reign of Christ, after so long a struggle in introducing that state⁠—forbidding us, therefore, to apply <abbr>chap.</abbr> 20:2⁠–⁠5 to that reign. Already, nearly six thousand years have transpired in which the work of redemption has been plied with all the wisdom, and love, and power of the great Actor: and we cannot doubt that quite a period of time must elapse before the day of consummation shall be ushered in ;⁠—though we hope and believe the time is comparatively near. Now, we should expect, after so much has been expended in the preparation, that a period of consummated and holy fruition of great length would succeed⁠—a period <em>so</em> long, that the introductory period of conflict and preparation would be as nothing, and be lost in the comparison. What, then, is a millennium of one thousand years, after six thousand years of sin and death? The creation of the world and of our race, on that hypothesis, were a failure. More of earth’s sons would be. lost than saved. The benevolence of God could not be vindicated. It were better that the world had never been made. Blessed be God, it will not be so. The day shall come in earth’s history, when the number of the lost shall be, in comparison with the happy multitude which no man can number, that shall have gone up to heaven, a mere infinitesimal. “He hath put <em>all</em> things under his feet.” 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15:24⁠–⁠28.</p>
				<p>4. The scene of the new Jerusalem is laid on earth. It comes down from God <em>out of</em> heaven, and <em>to</em> earth. Men are not represented as taken up to God, but the tabernacle of God is with men, and he dwells with them. The “nations” walk in the light of the holy city, and bring their glory and honor into it. But on the common hypothesis, “nations” would be among the things that were.</p>
				<p>5. The attempt to represent heaven by the imagery of a city and materials of earthly splendor, would be, to a truly spiritual mind, to let down the subject. The Bible nowhere⁠—and for the best of reasons⁠—makes any attempt to describe heaven. It makes an allusion to the degree of its blessedness, by accumulating hyperbole upon hyperbole. It is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. An extended attempt ata description or illustration of heaven, is quite aside from all the analogy of the Bible.</p>
				<p>We are happy to refer the reader to such high authority as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Watts, in support of our opinion that the new Jerusalem is to be on earth. The following beautiful hymn assumes our exegesis in this particular.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<p>
						<span>“Lo, what a glorious sight appears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To our believing eyes!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The earth and seas are passed away,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the old rolling skies.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>From the third heaven, where God resides,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That holy, happy place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The new Jerusalem comes down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Adorned with shining grace.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Attending angels shout for joy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And the bright armies sing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘Mortals, behold the sacred seat</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your descending King.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The God of glory down to men</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Removes his blessed abode;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men, the dear objects of his grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he the loving God.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>His own soft hand shall wipe the tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From every weeping eye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pains, and groans, and griefs, and fears,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And death itself shall die.’</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>How long, dear Saviour, O how long</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall this bright hour delay?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fly swifter round, ye wheels of time,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And bring the welcome day.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The following is from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Tholuck. “The idea that the perfected kingdom of Christ is to be transferred to heaven, is properly a modern notion. According to Paul and the Revelation of John, the kingdom of God is placed upon the earth, in so far as this itself has part in the universal transformation. This exposition has been adopted and defended by most of the oldest commentators; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> Chrysostom, Theodoret, Hieronymus, Augustine, Luther, Koppe, and others. Luther says, in his lively way, ‘God will make, not the earth only, but the heavens also, much more beautiful than they are at present. At present, we see the world in its working clothes; but hereafter it will be pee in its Kaster and Whit. suntide robes.’ ”</p>
				<p>Tholuck, and the authors he names, believed in a physical change or catastrophe of the globe, and that the new Jerusalem is to be on this literally new earth. ‘We suppose this to be the opinion of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Watts. Let the idea of these men be so far modified as to recognize this as the language of bold imagery, and indicative of the great change that is to come over the character of men, and, as a consequence, over the material world and its uses and relations to men, as affected by intelligence and science, and their theory becomes ours. Is the literal or the analogical most in keeping with the hermeneutics of the present day? Can there be but one answer?</p>
				<p><abbr>Chap.</abbr> 22:14,15. By the “tree of life” and “the city” are here meant heaven, as in 2:7 and 3:12. This does not militate against the explanation given of 20:11⁠—22:5, as referring to an earthly state. The very design of this scene is to convey the idea that <em>heaven will come down to earth</em>. In <abbr>v.</abbr> 17, the allusion to the water of life as spoken of in <abbr>v.</abbr> 1 contemplates it as on earth, and accessible to any who thirst for it. Then again in <abbr>v.</abbr> 19, “the tree (not <em>book</em>, see Knapp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la"><abbr>Nov. Test.</abbr></i>) of life and the holy city” are considered as the reward of the good, therefore heavenly, as in 2:7, and 3:12.</p>
				<p>We have been thus particular in the consideration of the Apocalypse that our interpretation of what is said of the “first anastasis” in 20:4, 5, and also of the judgment scene in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 11⁠–⁠15, may be seen “in place.” As now interpreted, this language is not that of didactic theology, and of prose statement. Its connections forbid us so to regard it. It is the _ language of prophecy, and, as such, of bold imagery.. But, this admitted, and it is ours. The Apostle would represent a portion of the race as elevated by Christianity to a <em>higher life</em>. THe calls it a first anastasis⁠—an elevation halfway to heaven. How true to fact! The church even of the present day, as compared with heathendom, is in that relative position. <abbr>Rev.</abbr> 20:4, 5, <em>becomes then a proof text of the strongest import in support of the views now advocated of the Anastasis</em>.</p>
				<p>We think, and we hope our readers will see, that our interpretation of the Apocalypse not only gives to these particular passages an import in harmony with similar language elsewhere, and a place in a system of truth that renders that system by their aid the more symmetrical; but that it makes the Apocalypse itself as a prophecy, consistent, and of easy and natural application. Truth is everywhere consistent with truth. And as the Bible is truth, when it shall be rightly understood, it will be in all its parts harmonious, and, as a whole, symmetrical, and beautiful to the beholder.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
