<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As another instance of the vagueness of such principles of interpretation, is the following from Barnes on John 5:25. “Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live.”</p>
					<p>“<em>The hour.</em> The time.</p>
					<p><em>Is coming.</em> Under the preaching of the Gospel, as well as in the resurrection of the dead.</p>
					<p><em>Now is.</em> It is now taking place. Sinners were converted under his ministry, and brought to spiritual life.</p>
					<p><em>The dead.</em> Either the dead in sins, or those that are in their graves. The language of the Saviour will apply to either. Language, in the Scriptures, is often so used as to describe two <em>similar</em> events. Thus the destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the world are described by Jesus in the same language. <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24, 25. The return of the Jews from Babylon, and the coming of the Messiah, and the spread of his Gospel, are described in the same language by Isaiah. <abbr>Isa.</abbr> 40⁠–⁠61. The renewal of the heart, and the raising of the dead at the judgment, are here also described in similar language⁠—because they so far resemble each other, that the same language will apply to both.</p>
					<p><em>The voice of the Son of God.</em> The <em>voice</em> is that by which we give command. Jesus raised up the dead by his command, or by his authority. When he did it he spoke, or commanded it to be done. Mark 5:41; ‘He took the damsel by the hand, and <em>said</em>, <i xml:lang="arc">Talitha-cumi.</i>’ Luke 7:14; ‘And he came and touched the bier⁠—and <em>said</em>, Young man, I say unto thee, arise.’ John 11:43; ‘He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.’ So it is by his command that those who are dead in sins are quickened, or made alive. (Verse 21.) And so at the day of judgment the dead will be raised by his command or voice, though there is no reason to think that there his voice will be audibly heard. (Verse 28.)</p>
					<p><em>Shall live.</em> Shall be restored to life.”</p>
					<p>What, we are ready to ask, is the meaning of John 5:25? Does it imply a moral change, or a physical? The Saviour is not speaking of both at the same time. There is no such necessary connection between the renewal of the heart and the raising of the body at the resurrection, as that the one cannot be spoken of without at the same time speaking of the other. To which is this language of the Saviour to be understood as referring? This comment gives no answer. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is claimed by some, that but <em>one</em> false Christ appeared. We cannot <em>know</em> this. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Just as these pages are going to press, we are reading the article of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Robinson in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tracts and Essays</i> on <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24. We are happy to find so very high authority for most of our interpretation of this chapter. But, although we dissent from the great learning and candor of the Professor with diffidence, we cannot subscribe to some of his positions.</p>
					<p>In the first place, we are not satisfied that the language of the Saviour should be understood to reach down to the war of Adrian, <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 135. There is, indeed, a transition period between the Mosaic and the Christian Dispensations. It is not very important to fix precisely its limits. In some sort the law and the prophets were only until John. Then began the process of change. John was preparing the way for the Messiah. An important step was taken in that process when Christ entered upon his public ministry. And still more, when, after his death for the sins of the world, he rose from the dead and began the exercise of his functions as a spiritual and unseen Saviour. He is then said to be constituted “Son of God in power.” Yet his coming as Son of Man was not consummated till after the events predicted in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:29. Shall we find the terminus of the transition period in the year 70 or 135? We think the former. There is certainly, on a different hypothesis, no inconsiderable strain upon such language as “This generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled” (24:34); and “There be some of you standing here, which shall not taste of death till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom” (16:28). At the time when the Saviour used this language⁠—whatever may have been true in the days of the Patriarchs, and so near to an antediluvian ancestry⁠—“generation” could not have implied a period of one hundred years and more. Moses placed old age at “threescore years and ten” (<abbr>Ps.</abbr> 90:10). We find it difficult to believe that those to whom this language was addressed would think of the limit within which the events were to happen as so remote.</p>
					<p>Then again, what the Saviour says 24:4⁠–⁠18 of the signs of his coming, by the knowledge of which his disciples were to flee to a place of safety, and did in fact flee and were saved⁠—thanks from the hearts of thousands to the Professor for identifying the place⁠—all points to <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 70. The holy city was then burned and the Temple destroyed. From that time the Mosaic service was observed in no such manner as to entitle it to the name.</p>
					<p>Still our theory in regard to the coming of the Son of Man will not be tenacious on this point. It is equally consistent with either hypothesis of the termination of the transition period.</p>
					<p>Secondly, Professor Robinson makes a transition from the destruction of Jerusalem to the General Judgment at 24:43. We cannot see it thus. Verses 43 <abbr>seq.</abbr> have as close a grammatical and logical connection with what precedes, as have <abbr>vs.</abbr> 36⁠–⁠42 with what precedes them. The Professor admits that watchfulness with reference to the destruction of Jerusalem is inculcated in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 36⁠–⁠42. But nothing seems to us plainer than that <abbr>v.</abbr> 43 stands in closest connection with <abbr>v.</abbr> 42. “But,” <i xml:lang="el">δὲ</i>, certainly not adversative, but continuative, and “serving to introduce something else,⁠ ⁠… continuative or explanatory.” The fearful crisis of which he had been speaking, would come as a thief in the night.</p>
					<p>And we cannot see, as does <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">R.</abbr> the connections of the parallel case in Luke (12:37⁠–⁠40). The address of which this is a part continues to 13:9. Peter asks respecting the admonition, if it had or had not exclusive application to the disciples (<abbr>v.</abbr> 41). That part of the answer recorded in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 49⁠–⁠53, makes it certain that the day of evil with reference to which he was warning them, was of earth and time. It was a “fire <em>on earth</em>.” The evils were such as man inflicts upon his fellow. And <abbr>v.</abbr> 56 is specific: “Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern <em>this time</em>?”⁠—the time of your national destruction. In <abbr>chap.</abbr> 13:1 <abbr>seq.</abbr> allusion was made to the evils that came upon the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. The Saviour tells them that unless they repent they will perish in like manner, <i xml:lang="el">ὡσαύτως</i> <abbr>v.</abbr> 3, <i xml:lang="el">ὁμοίως</i> <abbr>v.</abbr> 5. We would not press these adverbs too hard upon the manner rather than the fact; yet we cannot resist the impression that they have so much of the former import as to forbid the supposition that the evil threatened was of the future world. The parable of the fig-tree in <abbr>vs.</abbr> 6⁠–⁠9 points to the destruction of the Jewish nation.</p>
					<p>We think, then, that a transition to a new topic is not made at <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 24:43⁠—nor elsewhere in these chapters. The train of thought is continuous from 24:3 to the end of <abbr>chap.</abbr> 25. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Read the Epistle with this thought in mind, especially 1:1, 9⁠–⁠11; 2:1⁠–⁠16; 3:1, 13⁠–⁠18; 4:13; 5:6, 9. Observe such places as “one another,” 4:11; 5:9, 16;⁠—“among you,” 1:26; 3:13; 4:1; 5:13;⁠—“any of you,” 1:5; 2:16 <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It will be convenient, as a means of dispensing with oft-repeated circumlocutions, to anglicize <i xml:lang="el">παρουσία</i>. The reader will then understand by Parousia the “Coming of the Lord,” as above defined. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macknight translates and paraphrases <abbr>v.</abbr> 2 thus: “<em>That ye be not soon shaken from your purpose</em> of following the business of the present life, <em>nor put into confusion, neither by</em> any revelation of the <em>Spirit</em>, which these deceivers may feign, <em>nor by</em> any <em>verbal message, nor by letter</em>,” which they bring to you, <em>as from us, importing</em>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He adds the following note: “<em>Soon shaken from your purpose.</em> <i xml:lang="el">Σαλευθῆναι</i>, is to be shaken, as ships are by the waves while lying at anchor. Joined with <i xml:lang="el">ἀπὸ νοός</i>, it signifies to be shaken or moved from one’s purposes or resolution. Chandler interprets it, shaken from the true meaning of my former letter.” We are inclined to adopt the hypothesis of Chandler. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Professor Crosby, assuming the correctness of the rendering, in the common version, of <i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i>, makes a distinction between <i xml:lang="el">ἐνέστηκεν</i> (“is at hand”) of <abbr>v.</abbr> 2, and <i xml:lang="el">ἤγγικε</i> and its kindred words in the above quotations, claiming that <i xml:lang="el">ἐνέστηκεν</i> implies the more instant occurrence of that of which it is predicated. Indeed he renders it by “<em>already present</em>,”⁠—as if the Apostle designed not to deny that the Parousia was near, but only that it was not already present. The train of thought in connection forbids us to suppose that the Thessalonians considered the day of the Lord a present reality. What he said of the Parousia in his first Epistle, would of necessity lead them to understand by it that which implied a very great change upon the present. <i xml:lang="el">Ἐνέστηκεν</i> can hardly be considered more emphatic with reference to the immediateness of the Parousia, than the above texts. — <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Second Advent</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 78. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Idioms</i>, Appendix, §67. Pleonasm, 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 445. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Who is weak, but I share his weakness? Who is caused to fall, but I burn with indignation? If I must needs boast, it shall not be in my strength, but in my weakness. God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, He who is blessed forever, knows that I lie not.</p>
					<p>“In Damascus, the governor under Aretas the king kept watch over the city with a garrison, purposing to apprehend me; and I was let down by the wall, through a window, in a basket, and thus [not by my strength, but by my weakness] I escaped his hands. It is not for me, then, to boast.” —<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life and Epistles of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 116. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Robinson (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Lex.</abbr></i>) defines <i xml:lang="el">ὡς ὅτι</i> “to wit that.” Adopting the opinion of Chandler, expressed in a previous note, that <i xml:lang="el">νοός</i> signifies <em>opinion</em>, the text will read thus: “That ye be not soon shaken from the opinion⁠ ⁠… <em>to wit, that</em> the day of the Lord is at hand.” Liddell and Scott make <i xml:lang="el">ὡς</i> pleonastic in this phrase in classic usage. It would then read, “the opinion that the day,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If it be objected that this is to make Peter too geological for his day, we reply that the common version is open to the same objection, and in an equal degree. If the globe is “reserved unto fire,” it is to be burned by the breaking out of its internal fires, and not by the spread of fire upon its surface. But what did the men of Peter’s time know of the internal fire of our planet? If it was a matter of pure revelation, we may as well suppose it to be revealed to the Apostle that these internal fires had become so reduced, and the crust of the earth so thick and consolidated, that no other such geological change as that which produced the flood, would ever again happen. His argument is that when the flood occurred there was a geological possibility of it. If the protasis be geological, why not also the apodosis? What is said in <abbr>v.</abbr> 5 of the heavens as of great antiquity, is equally in advance of the astronomical knowledge of that day. <a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“To you,” in <abbr>v.</abbr> 11, is not genuine, and was probably inserted by some transcriber because it was found in <abbr>v.</abbr> 9.⁠—See Knapp. <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>Rob.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Lex.</abbr></i> <i xml:lang="el">Ἐγείρω</i>, <abbr>b. γ.</abbr> <a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span xml:lang="he">גָּאַל</span> signifies <em>to redeem</em>, also <em>to deliver</em>, or <em>rescue</em>. It is applied to Jehovah as delivering his people from bondage (<abbr>Ex.</abbr> 6:6), from Babylonian captivity (<abbr>Isa.</abbr> 43:1). It is applied to man as regaining possession of land under mortgage (<abbr>Lev.</abbr> 25:26). Robinson renders it thus: “<em>I know that my Redeemer liveth</em>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> God himself, who will deliver me from these calamities.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr class="eoc">Heb. Lex.</abbr></i> See Knapp, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Theol.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 614. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="el">Ἀνάστασις.</i> It will be convenient on the following pages to Anglicize this word. We shall use Anastasis to signify <em>the future life⁠—life beyond the grave</em>. The verb <em>anastasize</em> will also be used. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The distinction between <i xml:lang="el">ἔγερσις</i> (egersis) as denoting the resurrection of the body, and <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i> (anastasis) as indicating the future life, cannot, we think, be sustained. <i xml:lang="el">Ἔγερσις</i> occurs but once in the New Testament; and then to signify the revivification and coming out of the grave of Jesus Christ, as preceding the coming forth from their graves of certain persons whose bodies had been raised three days previously. <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 27:53.</p>
					<p>The verbs that correspond to these nouns, <i xml:lang="el">ἐγείρω</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἀνίστημι</i>, are used interchangeably. Compare <i xml:lang="el">ἐγείρω</i> in <abbr>Matt.</abbr> 27:53. Acts 3:15; 4:10; 5:30; 10:40, with <i xml:lang="el">ἀνίστημι</i> in Acts 2:24; 13:33, 34. Compare especially Acts 13:30 with <abbr>vs.</abbr> 33, 34 of the same chapter. These last instances must refer primarily to the body, which was not to see corruption; showing that <i xml:lang="el">ἀνίστημι</i> as well as <i xml:lang="el">ἐγείρω</i> is used with reference to the raising of the body. In 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15 the verb is uniformly <i xml:lang="el">ἐγείρω</i>, while the corresponding noun is <i xml:lang="el">ἀνάστασις</i>. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some, on the authority of the Codex Alexandrinus, read <i xml:lang="el">ἡμετέραν</i> for <i xml:lang="el">ὑμετέραν</i>. So Griesbach. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The following are extracts from Notes by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Prof.</abbr> Stuart in his edition of Ernesti’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Elements of Interpretation</i>.</p>
					<p>“Who is ignorant of the innumerable controversies that have arisen about the tropical and literal sense of a multitude of passages in the Sacred Writings? Almost all the enthusiasm and extravagance that have been exhibited in respect to religion, have had no better support than <em>gross material conceptions of figurative language</em>; or, not unfrequently, language that should be <em>properly</em> understood has been <em>tropically</em> construed. There is no end to the mistakes on this ground. Nor are they limited to enthusiasts and fanatics. They develop themselves not unfrequently in the writings of men grave, pious, excellent, and in other parts of theological science very learned. Indeed, it is but a recent thing that it has come to be considered as a science, and a special and essential branch of theological science, to study the nature of language, and above all the nature of the Oriental, Biblical languages. Long has this been admitted in respect to the classics, and all works of science in ancient languages. But in regard to the Bible, the most ancient book in the world, and written in a language the idiom of which is exceedingly diverse from our own, it seems to have been very generally taken for granted, that no other study was necessary to discover its meaning, than what is devoted to any common English book. At least, a Bible with marginal references, studied by a diligent and careful use of these references, might surely be understood in a most satisfactory manner. In very many cases, the <em>first</em> thing has been to study theology; the <em>second</em>, to read the Bible, in order to find proofs of what has already been adopted as matter of belief. This order is now beginning to be reversed. The nature of language, of Scripture language, of figurative language, and of interpretation, is now beginning to be studied as a science, the acquisition of which is one of the greatest ends of study; as it is the only proper mode of leading the theologian to the knowledge of what the Bible really contains. Here, too, is a common arbiter of the disputes that exist in the Christian world. <em>The nature of language and of tropical words, thoroughly understood, will prostrate, among all intelligent and candid men who really love the truth, a great part of all the diversities of opinion that exist.</em>”⁠—<abbr>p.</abbr> 74.</p>
					<p>“<em>The time is coming</em> (I cannot doubt it), <em>when all the dark places of the Bible will be elucidated to the satisfaction of intelligent and humble Christians</em>. But how near at hand that blessed day is, I do not pretend to know. ‘The Lord hasten it in its time!’ ”⁠—<abbr>p.</abbr> 19. <a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="el">Οὐκ ἔζησαν.</i> “Again,” as in our translation, is not implied in the Greek. It was added as in keeping with the idea entertained of the anastasis spoken of in this verse. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hades is the term by which the Seventy translate the <em>Sheol</em> of the Old Testament. The word signifies “something dreadful, dark, and silent, about which the most prying eye, and listening ear, can acquire no information” (Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Dis.</abbr></i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>), and corresponds to the conceptions of the men of that day, of the world beyond the grave (<i xml:lang="el">ᾅδης</i>, from <em>a</em> privative, and <i xml:lang="el">εἴδω</i> to see). The life beyond the grave, is no longer to be such a region of darkness. It is to be a world of positiveness, and light, and joy. So death is to be no longer death, but a transition painless, welcome, waited for. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Synod of Dort says, “Our Lord Jesus Christ will come from heaven, <em>corporeally and visibly</em>.” <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The Jews supposed that the dead would be awakened by the <em>sound of a trumpet</em>. Traces of this opinion are to be found in the Chaldaic paraphrasts. At first this representation belonged only to the figurative phraseology of prophecy; for the people were commonly assembled by the sound of the trumpet, as was the case in the assembling at Sinai; and in general, a trumpet was used to give signs and signals, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> for an onset in battle, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Afterwards, this representation was literally understood, and the size of the trumpet was supposed to be a thousand yards, and that it was blown seven times.” <cite>—⁠Knapp’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Theology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 625</cite> <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The resurrection is the raising of the body and reunion of it with the soul. Death and infirmity and sin then reign over the body no more; and it is a spiritual body, that is, a body adapted to spiritual uses: but <em>as yet</em> it is not <em>fashioned</em> like unto Christ’s glorious body. This takes place subsequently. The dead are first raised, and <em>then</em> both they and the living are all changed at the same time.” “They who are alive shall be caught up along with the raised saints, and <em>there being changed</em>, they shall ever be with the Lord.” —Landis on the Resurrection, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343, 305.</p>
					<p>We will venture to call <em>this</em> spiritual body a “tertium quid.” It certainly is not the natural body (<i xml:lang="el">σῶμα ψυχικόν</i>), nor is it the spiritual body (<i xml:lang="el">σῶμα πνευματικόν</i>) of Paul, 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> 15. <a href="chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
