<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Preface</h2>
			<p>Early in his ministry, the writer attempted to gain some definite views on the subject presented in this volume. He consulted authors, and especially commentators. The effect was “confusion worse confounded.” He then, as the only hope, went directly and alone to the volume of Inspiration, and attempted to study the Scriptures scripturally⁠—to make the Bible its own interpreter. The result is the opinions expressed in the following pages.</p>
			<p>He had thought several years since of submitting his views to the public. But just then, that volume of brilliant truths and startling errors, “Bush on the Resurrection,” made its appearance. This was soon followed by a volume in reply, full of gross personal abuse, and of the odium theologicum, and withal utterly without discrimination or logic. It was supposed that the public, by that time, must have become wearied, if not disgusted; and that nothing more on the general subject should, for the time being, solicit its attention.</p>
			<p>It has been an object with the writer to make his book as small as possible. Instead of attempting to make the argument on each separate point complete and full, he has aimed in most cases to be suggestive only, by giving merely the outline of thought. The strongest argument in support of the theory advocated, is found in the contemplation of the subject as a whole, and in the fact that it goes through the Bible, and by a natural and easy exegesis, disposes of an entire class of texts that have given great embarrassment to commentators. We have not designedly passed over a single point of difficulty. The evidence that you have the true skeleton-key to the building, is not in the fact that some of the doors are opened by it, but in the fact that at every door the bolt yields readily to its touch. This is claimed for our theory.</p>
			<p>The reader not familiar with Greek, must pardon the constant reference to the original Scriptures. The subject can be thoroughly discussed in no other way. Every translation of the Bible, must be, to some extent, a paraphrase. The authors of the Common Version had a theory on the subject of this volume. Of necessity their translation was modified by that. theory. This the reader will see as he proceeds. The reference by us, therefore, must be direct to the words which the Holy Spirit has taught. We have taken special pains to render the book readable to the mere English scholar. And we hope, that while such will not be able to appreciate fully some of the criticisms, they will so perceive the general course of argument to be in keeping with the general drift of the Scriptures, as to recognize their harmony.</p>
			<p>It would savor of presumption to say that the hypothesis we propose, will, when once propounded, commend itself to those familiar with the New Testament, as too obviously .true to need labored proof. It is certainly true that most that is said in the New Testament on the subject, seems to necessitate our theory by an import obvious and positive. The few apparent exceptions are found in instances of Hebrew idiom transferred to the Greek language, and which, as a consequence, have been understood literally.</p>
			<p>To such of his brethren in the sacred office as may dissent from the theory here advocated, the author would propose that, with the common theory, they go through the New Testament with as rigid an exegesis as is here attempted⁠—if they can.</p>
			<p>The author commends his little work to the blessing of the great Head of the church. He could not have consented to its publication, with the inevitable sequences, but for the hope that the cause of the Bible might be promoted by it. It is believed that one of the conditions of a more spiritual religion, and of a fuller development of Christian character, is, bringing the realities of the unseen world very much nearer. The primitive church were constantly waiting for and “hasting” the Coming of the Lord. To the modern church, that Coming is far away in an indefinite future. To the primitive church the Coming of the Lord was a doctrine soul-stirring and of mighty power. To the modern church it is merely a matter of theory and of creed, but in no sort a practical theme. Are the utterances of the modern pulpit on this subject, the same as were those of apostolic preaching?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
